=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
A T RANSACTIONAL PERSPECTIVE ON
EXECUTE -ORDER -VALIDATE BLOCKCHAINS
A PREPRINT
Pingcheng Ruan
National University of Singapore
ruanpc@comp.nus.edu.sg
Dumitrel Loghin
National University of Singapore
dumitrel@comp.nus.edu.sg
Quang-Trung Ta
National University of Singapore
taqt@comp.nus.edu.sg
Meihui Zhang
Beijing Institute of Technology
meihui zhang@bit.edu.cn
Gang Chen
Zhejiang University
cg@zju.edu.cn
Beng Chin Ooi
National University of Singapore
ooibc@comp.nus.edu.sg
March 24, 2020
ABSTRACT
Smart contracts have enabled blockchain systems to evolve from simple cryptocurrency platforms,
such as Bitcoin, to general transactional systems, such as Ethereum. Catering for emerging business
requirements, a new architecture called execute-order-validate has been proposed in Hyperledger
Fabric to support parallel transactions and improve the blockchain’s throughput. However, this
new architecture might render many invalid transactions when serializing them. This problem is
further exaggerated as the block formation rate is inherently limited due to other factors beside data
processing, such as cryptography and consensus.
In this work, we propose a novel method to enhance the execute-order-validate architecture, by re-
ducing invalid transactions to improve the throughput of blockchains. Our method is inspired by
state-of-the-art optimistic concurrency control techniques in modern database systems. In contrast
to existing blockchains that adopt database’s preventive approaches which might abort serializable
transactions, our method is theoretically more ﬁne-grained. Speciﬁcally, unserializable transactions
are aborted before ordering and the remaining transactions are guaranteed to be serializable. For
evaluation, we implement our method in two blockchains respectively, FabricSharp on top of Hy-
perledger Fabric, and FastFabricSharp on top of FastFabric. We compare the performance of Fab-
ricSharp with vanilla Fabric and three related systems, two of which are respectively implemented
with one standard and one state-of-the-art concurrency control techniques from databases. The re-
sults demonstrate that FabricSharp achieves 25% higher throughput compared to the other systems
in nearly all experimental scenarios. Moreover, the FastFabricSharp’s improvement over FastFabric
is up to 66%.
Keywords Optimistic Concurrency Control, Blockchain, Execute-Order-Validate, Transaction, Database
1 Introduction
Blockchains have stricken the world like a storm. The concept of blockchain, originating from Nakamoto’s Bitcoin
whitepaper [21], proposes to employ a hashed chain of blocks to batch historical monetary transactions. This chain is
distributed across a network of mutually distrusting nodes that run a proof-of-work (PoW) consensus to consistently
replicate the chain and synchronize the state. The consensus groups the transactions into blocks, and the nodes serially
execute the transactions in a block to update their state. While Bitcoin only supports cryptocurrency operations,
Ethereum was designed to support Turing-complete smart contracts that encode arbitrary data processing logic [31].
With Ethereum, blockchains evolved from cryptocurrency platforms to distributed transactional systems.
arXiv:2003.10064v1  [cs.DC]  23 Mar 2020
=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
A PREPRINT - MARCH 24, 2020
No-op 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2
Zipfian coefficient 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
tps
Throughput
Effective Aborted
Figure 1: Fabric’s raw and effective throughput under both no-op transactions and single modiﬁcation transactions
with varying skewness
Blockchain systems can be classiﬁed into permissionless (public), such as Bitcoin and Ethereum, and permissioned
(private), such as Hyperledger Fabric [4]. In public blockchains, the data and transactional logic are transparent
to the public, hence, are subject to private data leakage. Due to their openness, public blockchains use expensive
PoW consensus. This, together with the serial transaction execution limit these systems’ capacity. Addressing the
limitations of public blockchains, Hyperledger Fabric is a private blockchain that supportsconcurrent transactions [4].
A Fabric blockchain requires its members to enroll through a trusted membership service in order to interact with the
blockchain. In this paper, we focus on permissioned blockchains as they are more suitable for supporting applications
such as supply-chain, healthcare and resource sharing, and in particular, we use Fabric as the underlying blockchain
system.
Fabric supports a new transaction execution architecture called execute-order-validate (EOV). In this architecture, a
transaction’s lifecycle consists of three phases. In the ﬁrst phase, execution, a client sends the transaction to a set
of nodes, or peers, speciﬁed by an endorsement policy. The transaction is executed by these peers in parallel and
its effects in terms of read and written states are recorded. Moreover, transactions from different clients may be
parallelized during the execution. In the second phase, ordering, a consensus protocol is used to produce a totally
ordered sequence of endorsed transactions grouped in blocks. This order is broadcast to all peers. In the third phase,
validation, each peer validates the state changes from the endorsed transactions with respect to the endorsement policy
and serializability.
The new EOV architecture limits the execution details of a transaction to the endorsing peers to enhance conﬁdentiality
and exploit concurrency. But such concurrency comes at the cost of aborting transactions that do not abide serializ-
ability. We evaluate the impact of concurrency control in Fabric on the setup described in Section 5. We measure both
the raw and effective peak throughputs under both no-op transactions, with no data access, and update transactions,
with varying skewness controlled by the zipﬁan coefﬁcient. The raw throughput represents the in-ledger transaction
rate, while the effective throughput represents committed transactions by excluding the aborted transactions from raw
throughput. In Figure 1, a bar reports the raw throughput, while its blue part reports the effective throughput. The raw
throughput is constant (677 tps) despite the workload type and request skewness. But with higher skewness, a larger
proportion of transactions are aborted for serializability.
There are two notable directions attempting to solve this issue. The ﬁrst is to improve upon Fabric’s architecture to
enhance its attainable throughput [22, 27, 6, 1]. For example, FastFabric proposes to split a node’s functionality to
alleviate the bottleneck and achieves the highest throughput among all improvements of Fabric [16]. However, these
approaches are implementation-speciﬁc and might not generalize well to other blockchains. The second direction
is to abstract out the transaction lifecycle to reduce abort rate. For example, Fabric++ [26] uses well-established
concurrency techniques from databases to early abort transactions or reorder them to reconcile the potential conﬂicts.
Our work corresponds to the second direction, as a major attempt to databasify blockchains. Here, we take a princi-
pled approach to learn from transactional analysis techniques in databases with optimistic concurrency control (OCC)
and apply them to enhance transaction processing in blockchains. We formally analyze the behavior of the current
implementations of Fabric and Fabric++, and discover that both achieveStrong Serializability [5] (as described in Sec-
tion 3.2). In fact, these implementations are more stringent than One-Copy Serializability (or simply Serializability),
as prescribed by the original Fabric protocol [4]. Both systems employ a preventive approach which might over-abort
transactions that are still serializable. In contrast, our proposal consists of a novel reordering technique that eliminates
unnecessary abort due to in-ledger conﬂicts, with the serializability guarantee established upon our theoretical insights.
Our approach does not change Fabric’s architecture, therefore it is orthogonal to the aforementioned optimizations,
such as FastFabric [16] and [22, 27, 6, 1].
In summary, our paper makes the following contributions:
2
=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
A PREPRINT - MARCH 24, 2020
• We theoretically analyze the resemblance of transaction processing in blockchains with EOV architecture and
databases with optimistic concurrency control (Section 3.1). Based on this resemblance, we analyze the transac-
tional behavior of state-of-the-art EOV blockchains, such as Fabric and Fabric++ (Section 3.2).
• We propose a novel theorem to identify transactions that can never be reordered for serializability (Section 3.3).
Based on this theorem, we propose efﬁcient algorithms to early ﬁlter out such transactions (Section 3.4), with the
guarantee of serializability for the remaining transactions after reordering. We also discuss the security implica-
tions of our proposal (Section 3.5).
• We implement our proposed algorithms on top of two existing blockchains. First, we use Hyperledger Fabric
v1.3 as the base and name our implementation FabricSharp (or Fabric# for short). Second, we start from FastFab-
ric [16], which obtains the highest throughput among all optimizations of Fabric, and name our implementation
FastFabricSharp (or FastFabric# for short).
• We extensively evaluate FabricSharp by comparing it with the vanilla Fabric, Fabric++, and two other implemen-
tations based on database concurrency control techniques from one standard approach [10] and a recent proposal
by Ding et al [12]. The experimental results show that the throughput of FabricSharp is more than 25% higher
compared to the other systems. In addition, the FastFabricSharp’s improvement over FastFabric is up to 66%.
The remaining of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides background on EOV blockchains and OCC
techniques. Our theoretical analysis follows in Section 3, ending with our reordering algorithm. Section 4 describes the
implementation of our approach. Section 5 reports our experimental results. We review the related work in Section 6,
before concluding in Section 7.
After Block 1
Key Version Value
A 1,1 100
B 1,2 101
C 1,3 102
Txn1:
Endorsing Peers:
State
After Block 3
Key Version Value
A 1,1 100
B 2,1 201
C 3,3 303
State
After Block 2
Key Version Value
A 1,1 100
B 2,1 201
C 2,1 201
Proposal
Orderer1Txn 5
Txn2, Txn3, Txn4
Block 3
Txn 2-5
R(B) R(C) W(C)
Txn3:R(B) W(C)
Txn4:R(C) W(B)
Txn5: W(A) R(C)
R(A) R(B) W(C)Txn2:
State
Orderer2
Consensus 
(Kafka)
State
(a)
Enqueue Txn in Pending Queue
Wait for Txn from Consensus
Reach the Block 
Formation Condition?
Reorder Txns in Queue
Form the Block from Pending 
Txns & Empty the Queue
Deliver the Block to Peers
YES
NO (b)
Figure 2: (a) Example of transaction workﬂow in Fabric. An arrow represents the lifespan of a transaction’s execution
(simulation), e.g, Txn1 starts its execution immediately after block 1 and ﬁnishs its simulation after block 2. (b)
Procedures replicated in each Fabric Orderer. Fabric++ introduces a reordering step before the block formation to
reduce the transaction abort rate.
2 Background
2.1 EOV architecture in Fabric and Fabric++
Hyperledger Fabric [4] is a state-of-the-art permissioned blockchain that features a modular design based on the EOV
architecture. Fabric++ [26] is an optimization of Fabric, which reorders transactions after consensus to reduce the abort
rate. A Fabric/Fabric++ blockchain is run by a set of authenticated nodes, whose identity is provided by a membership
service. A node in this blockchain has one of the following three roles: (i) client which submits a transaction proposal
for execution, (ii) peer which executes and validates transaction proposals, or (iii) orderer which orders transactions
and batches them in blocks. Transaction order is determined collectively by all orderers in the blockchain based on a
consensus protocol.
The state of a blockchain after forming a block is maintained by a versioned key-value store. Each entry in this
store is a tuple ( key, ver, val), where key is a unique name representing the entry, and ver and val are the entry’s
latest version and value, respectively. Moreover, ver is a pair consisting of the sequence number of the block and
the transaction that updated the entry. For example, in Figure 2a, the entry (C, (2, 1), 201) in the state after block 2
indicates that the key C contains the latest value 201 which was lastly updated by the 1st transaction in block 2.
3
=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
A PREPRINT - MARCH 24, 2020
Table 1: Summary of transactions in Figure 2. Staled reads and installed writes are respectively marked in red and
blue colors. The symbols ✓, x, N.A. respectively indicate committed, aborted, or not-allowed transactions.
Txn1 Txn2 Txn3 Txn4 Txn5
Readset Key B C A B B C C
Version 1,2 2,1 1,1 1,2 2,1 2,1 2,1
Writeset Key C C C B A
Value 301 302 303 304 305
Commit status Fabric N.A. x ✓ x x
Fabric++ x x x ✓ ✓
In Fabric/Fabric++, the workﬂow of a transaction consists of three phases: execution, ordering, and validation. We
elaborate on these phases below, using the example in Figure 2a.
Execution. In this phase, clients propose transactions consisting of smart contract invocations to a set of endorsing
peers, which are selected by an endorsement policy. Each endorsing peer executes transaction proposals concurrently
and speculatively and returns the simulation results together with its endorsement signature. The results contain two
value sets called the readset and the writeset which respectively represent the version dependencies (all keys read
along with their version numbers) and the state updates (all keys modiﬁed along with their new values) produced
by the simulation. For example, the readset and writeset of transactions in Figure 2a are summarized in Table 1.
Throughout the execution, a transaction holds a read lock on the state database to guarantee that read values are the
latest. Transactions that read across blocks, such as Txn1 in Figure 2a, are not allowed in Fabric. In contrast, Fabric++
optimistically removes this lock for more parallelism but aborts transactions that read across blocks. After a client
collects enough identical simulation results as required by the endorsement policy, it packages them into a single
transaction and submits it to orderers.
Ordering. In this second phase, orderers receive transactions and sequence them into a total order to form a block,
as shown in Figure 2b. Each orderer may belong to different administrative domains and receive different transaction
proposals from various clients. But all orderers rely on a single consensus protocol to establish a common transaction
order. Fabric/Fabric++ outsources this consensus service to Kafka. With the consistent transaction stream from the
consensus, each orderer employs the same block formation protocol to batch transactions into blocks, and consequently
delivers them to peers. A block is formed when the number of pending transactions reach the threshold or a timeout
triggers. For example, in Figure 2a, Orderer1 receives Txn5 and Orderer2 receives Txn2, Txn3, and Txn4. They send
the transactions to the consensus service and receive the same transaction order. Based on this order, both orderers
package the transactions into identical blocks, i.e., block 3 with Txn2 to Txn5, given that the protocol limits the
maximum number of transactions per block to 4.
Validation. This phase is executed by each peer after a block has been retrieved from orderers. Transactions in a
block are sequentially validated based on the corresponding endorsement policy and transaction serializability. The
serializability of a transaction is tested by inspecting the staleness of its readset. The transaction is marked as invalid
if it reads a key whose version at the read time is inconsistent (or older) than the latest version. For example, in
Figure 2a, transaction Txn2 in block 2 is unserializable since it reads key B with version (1, 2) from block 1, which is
inconsistent with the latest version (2, 1) in block 2. Suppose that Txn3 passes the serializability test and updates the
version of key C from (2, 1) to (3, 3) in block 3. Then, transactions Txn4 and Txn5 become invalid, since they both
read an inconsistent version of key C in block 2. Hence, after this validation phase, only transaction Txn3 in block
3 is committed, while transactions Txn2, Txn4, Txn5 are aborted. To satisfy the serializability constraint, Fabric++
introduces a reordering step immediately before block formation but after consensus. The reordering is based on the
commit order determined by the consensus and the accessed records in the transactions. For example, each orderer
in Fabric++ puts Txn3 behind Txn4 and Txn5. Then, Txn4 and Txn5 are committed while Txn3 is aborted. Hence,
Fabric++ commits one more transaction than Fabric.
2.2 Optimistic Concurrency Control in Databases
Unlike pessimistic concurrency control, the OCC technique does not hold locks to regulate transactional interference.
Instead, each transaction has a unique start timestamp assigned to it from a global atomic clock. All queries reﬂect
the state snapshot of the database at the start timestamp, without observing later changes. Each transaction is also
assigned an end timestamp. Before committing, the database system checks the validity of a transaction based on these
two timestamps and the accessed records. OCC can easily achieve Snapshot Isolation, which disallows concurrent
transactions updating the same key [7]. Considering the fact that Snapshot Isolation suffers anomalies such as Lost
Update and Write Skew, a number of attempts have been made to transform Snapshot Isolation to Serializable level
[15, 33, 9].
4
=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
A PREPRINT - MARCH 24, 2020
Key Version Value
A 1,1 100
B 1,2 101
C 1,3 102
R(A)
Txn1:State After Block 1 State After Block 2
R(B)
Txn2:
R(B) R(C)
Key Version Value
A 1,1 100
B 2,1 201
C 2,1 201
Block 3
W(C)
W(C)
 Read Version
Key Txn1
A 1,1
B 2,1
C -
Txn 
Status ✓
(a) Txn1, which reads across blocks, is snapshot consistent and can be scheduled with seri-
alizability. Txn2 is not as its early-read key B is updated before its execution ends.
R(A) 
R(B) W(C)
3,0 3,2
Txn1
Read Key
StartTS EndTS
Write Key
(b) Concise notation to represent a
transaction
Figure 3: Example of transactions reading across blocks
3 Theoretical Analysis
In this section, we ﬁrst describe the resemblance of transaction processing techniques in EOV blockchains and OCC
databases. Then, we use the transactional analysis method of OCC databases to reason about the serializability be-
havior of EOV blockchains, such as Fabric and Fabric++. Finally, we propose a reordering-based concurrency control
algorithm for ordering serializable transactions in EOV blockchains, along with the discussion on its security implica-
tions.
3.1 Resemblance in Transaction Processing
Similar to database systems where the concept database snapshot is used to describe a read-only, static view of a
database [20], in blockchains, we can deﬁne the similar concept of blockchain snapshot as follows.
Deﬁnition 1 (Blockchain snapshot). A blockchain snapshot is the state of a blockchain after a block is committed. Let
M be the sequence number of the committed block, then the corresponding snapshot is denoted as M and is said to
have the sequence number (M +1, 0) 1.
Deﬁnition 2 (Snapshot consistency). A transaction is snapshot consistent if there exists a blockchain snapshot M from
which all the transaction’s records are read.
Transactions in Fabric satisfy snapshot consistency since Fabric uses a lock to ensure the simulation is done against the
latest state. Fabric++ optimistically removes the lock but early aborts transactions which read across blocks. Hence, it
also satisﬁes the snapshot consistency. However, eliminating transactions based on cross-block reading might lead to
over-aborting snapshot consistent transactions.
For examle, in Figure 3a, Txn1 reads key A of version (1, 1) in snapshot 1 and key B of version (2, 1) in snapshot 2.
These versions are the same as the versions of keys A and B in snapshot 2. Hence, Txn1 is snapshot consistent with
block snapshot 2. In contrast, transaction Txn2, which also reads across blocks, does not achieve snapshot consistency
because the value of previously read key B changes in block 2.
Proposition 1. There exist snapshot-consistent transactions that read across blocks. For such a transaction, its block
snapshot is determined by its last read operation.
Proof. Txn1 in Figure 3a is a witness example. We have shown in the previous example thatTxn1 reads across blocks
1 and 2, and it is still consistent with block snapshot 2.
Proposition 1 shows that a legitimate transaction in an EOV blockchain can read across blocks, if their states are
consistent. This makes the EOV blockchain similar to an OCC database, as the latter also reads from consistent states
determined by the transaction’s start timestamp. We also observe that the blockchain’s sequence numbers have similar
properties with databases’ timestamps, such as atomicity, monotony, total order, and unique mapping to snapshots.
Therefore, we deﬁne the timestamps of blockchain transactions using their sequence numbers.
Deﬁnition 3 (Start timestamp). The start timestamp of transaction Txn, denoted by StartTs(Txn), is the sequence
number of its read snapshot.
1We use the two-value tuple with 0 ﬁxed for the second element. This is to facilitate the ordering relations < of sequence
numbers of blockchain snapshots and transaction timestamps.
5
=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
A PREPRINT - MARCH 24, 2020
Block M
Txn1
-
Block 
M+1
Txn2
Txn3
Txn2
(M+1, 1)≤(M, 0)
Txn3
(M+1, 2)(M+1, 0)
(M, 1)
Txn1
(M-1, 0)
Figure 4: Txn2 and Txn3 are in the same block and concurrent. Txn1 and Txn2 are in different blocks, but they are
still concurrent. Txn1 and Txn3 are not concurrent.
W(A)
W(A)w w
(a) n-ww
W(A)
R(A)
w r (b) n-wr
R(A)
W(A)
r w (c) n-rw
W(A)
W(A)
w w
(d) c-ww
R(A)
W(A)
r w (e) c-rw
R(A)
W(A)
r
w (f) anti-rw
Figure 5: Six canonical dependencies between snapshot transactions. Here, (a), (b), and (c) are non-concurrent and
(d), (e), and (f) are concurrent.
Deﬁnition 4 (End timestamp). The end timestamp of transactionTxn, denoted by EndTs(Txn), is its sequence number
in the block, determined by the consensus.
For example, in Figure 3a, Txn1 has StartTs(Txn1) = (3, 0) and EndTs(Txn1) = (3, 1), since it lastly reads from
block 2 and occupies the ﬁrst position in block 3. For brevity, in later paragraphs, we use the notation presented
in Figure 3b to denote a transaction. Moreoever, the sequence numbers of transactions’ start or end timestamps are
lexicographically ordered, e.g., (2, 1)< (2, 2) = (2, 2)< (3, 0).
Deﬁnition 5 (Concurrent transactions). Two transactions Txn1 and Txn2 are said to be concurrent if their execu-
tions overlap. To be speciﬁc, if Txn1 ends earlier than Txn2 (i.e., EndTs(Txn1) < EndTs(Txn2)), then Txn2 must
start before Txn1 ends (i.e., StartTs(Txn2) < EndTs(Txn1)). Otherwise, if Txn2 ends earlier than Txn1 (i.e.,
EndTs(Txn2)< EndTs(Txn1)), then Txn1 must start before Txn2 ends (i.e., StartTs(Txn1)< EndTs(Txn2)).
Proposition 2. Each pair of transactions in the same block are concurrent.
Proof. Suppose two transactions Txn1 and Txn2 are committed in the same blockM at positionp andq, respectively,
wherep < q. Since the latest block that Txn2 can read from is M−1, we have that: StartTs(Txn2)≤ (M, 0) <
EndTs(Txn1) = (M,p )< EndTs(Txn2) = (M,q ). Hence, Txn1 and Txn2 are concurrent.
Proposition 3. The reverse of Proposition 2 is not true: there are concurrent transactions not belonging to the same
block.
Proof. We present a witness example in Figure 4, where transactions Txn1 and Txn2 respectively belong to block
M andM +1. However, Txn2 reads from a block earlier than M. Hence, we have: StartTs(Txn2)≤ (M, 0) <
EndTs(Txn1) = (M, 1)< EndTs(Txn2) = (M +1, 1). Therefore, Txn1 and Txn2 are concurrent.
From the above two propositions, concurrency does not only occur between transactions within the same block. Fab-
ric++ fails to consider dependencies among transactions across blocks. Hence, its reordering effect is limited.
3.2 Serializability Analysis
Figure 5 shows all six scenarios of canonical transaction dependency (or conﬂict) between snapshot transactions,
as described by [15]. Among them, three dependencies, namely n-ww, n-wr, and n-rw are between non-concurrent
transactions. The other three dependencies, namely c-ww, c-rw, and anti-rw are between concurrent transactions.
According to the conﬂict serializability theorem in [30], the effect of a serializable transaction schedule is equivalent
6
=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
A PREPRINT - MARCH 24, 2020
Txn1
Txn2
R(A)
W(A)
Txn2
Txn1
W(A)
R(A)
Txn1
Txn2
W(A)
W(A)
Txn2
Txn1
W(A)
W(A)
Figure 6: Dependency order preserves between c-rw, anti-rw but not c-ww when switching commit order
to any serialized transaction history that respects dependency order. Note that the dependency graph of the serializable
transaction schedule must be acyclic.
Deﬁnition 6 (Strong Serializability). A schedule of transactions is Strong Serializable if its effect is equivalent to the
serialized history, which conforms to the transactions’ commit order determined by their end timestamps.
Theorem 1. A schedule of transactions without anti-rw achieves Strong Serializability.
Proof. We ﬁrst prove that any transaction schedule withoutanti-rw achieves Serializability. By contradiction, suppose
that such a transaction schedule does not achieve Serializability. Then, in the schedule there must be a subset of
transactions with a dependency cycle, in which the last committed transaction is denoted by Txn. Then Txn must
exhibit an anti-rw dependency because anti-rw is the only one among all six dependencies that relates later transactions
to earlier ones. But this contradicts our assumption. Hence, the transaction schedule is serializable. Next, we prove
that it also achieves Strong Serializability. Since the order of the ﬁve remaining dependencies is consistent to their
commit order, the serialized history that respects the commit order also respects the dependency order. According to
the conﬂict serializability theorem in [30], this serialized transaction history has the equivalent effect of the serializable
schedule. Hence, the transaction schedule is Strong Serializable.
We remark that Fabric/Fabric++ do not allow anti-rw between two transactions because the latter transaction would
read an old version of the updated key, hence, it must be aborted. Based on Theorem 1, transactions in Fabric/Fabric++
satisfy Strong Serializability, which is more stringent than Serializability [4]. This opens up the opportunity to reduce
the transaction abort rate.
3.3 Reorderability Analysis
Under Serializability instead of Strong Serializability, we formally analyze the reorderability of transactions in EOV
blockchains. We focus on determining a serializable schedule by switching the commit order of pending transactions.
Lemma 1. In blockchains, reordering can only happen between concurrent transactions.
Proof. Assume transaction reordering occurs between two non-concurrent transactions. These transactions are com-
mitted in different blocks, due to the contra-positive of Proposition 2. Switching their order means changing a previ-
ously committed block, which is impossible in blockchains due to their immutability.
Lemma 2. A transaction does not change its concurrency relationship with respect to others after reordering.
Proof. Assume the next block’s sequence number isM. For any pending transaction Txn, we have: StartTs(Txn)≤
(M, 0)< EndTs(Txn). Other transactions are classiﬁed into three cases. (i) For any non-concurrent transaction Txn1,
we have: EndTs(Txn1)< StartTs(Txn). Since reordering does not affect StartTs(Txn), the non-concurrency be-
tween Txn and Txn1 still holds. (ii) For any concurrent transaction Txn2 committed earlier than block M, we have:
StartTs(Txn)< EndTs(Txn2)< (M, 0)< EndTs(Txn). Since reordering cannot move the commit time of Txn be-
fore (M, 0), Txn2 and Txn remain concurrent. (iii) For any pending transactionTxn3, we have eitherStartTs(Txn)<
(M, 0)< EndTs(Txn3)< EndTs(Txn), or StartTs(Txn3)< (M, 0)< EndTs(Txn)< EndTs(Txn3). Hence, Txn
and Txn3 remain concurrent after reordering.
The above Lemma 1 ensures that reordering does not impact non-concurrent transactions and their dependencies.
Lemma 2 ensures that non-concurrent transactions are not introduced by reordering. Therefore, we restrict our analysis
to concurrent dependencies. We describe the dependency order of concurrent transactions using the two lemmas below.
Lemma 3. If two transactions Txn1 and Txn2 exhibit c-rw or anti-rw dependency, switching their commit order does
not affect their dependency order.
7
=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
A PREPRINT - MARCH 24, 2020
Txn1
Txn2
Txn3
r w
Txn1
Txn3
Txn2
w r
(a) An unreorderable schedule without c-ww
Txn1
Txn2
Txn3
w w
Txn1
Txn3
Txn2
w w (b) A reorderable schedule with c-ww
Figure 7: Transaction schedule reorderability
Proof. When Txn1 and Txn2 exhibit c-rw (or anti-rw) dependency, if we switch their commit order, they will ex-
hibit anti-rw (or c-rw) dependency, as illustrated in the left side of Figure 6. Consequently, in both two cases, their
dependency order remains the same, i.e., Txn1 reads a key which will be written later by Txn2.
Lemma 4. If two transactions Txn1 and Txn2 exhibit c-ww dependency, switching their commit order ﬂips their
dependency order.
Proof. When Txn1 and Txn2 exhibit c-ww dependency, Txn1 writes to a key which will be over-written by Txn2. If
their commit order is switched, then Txn2 and Txn1 will exhibit c-ww dependency, as illustrated in the right side of
Figure 6. Now, Txn2 writes to a key which will be over-written byTxn1. Consequently, the dependency order ofTxn1
and Txn2 is ﬂipped.
Finally, we present a theorem on reordering transactions containing a dependency cycle. This theorem is utilized in
Section 3.4 to design our novel ﬁne-grained concurrency control algorithm.
Theorem 2. A transaction schedule cannot be reordered to be serializable if there exists a cycle with no c-ww depen-
dencies involving pending transactions.
Proof. We classify the dependencies in the cycle into two categories. The ﬁrst category includes those involving at
least one committed transaction in the dependecy. Due to the immutability of blockchains, reordering does not impact
these dependencies, because the relative commit order of two transactions is ﬁxed. The second category includes all
dependencies between a pair of pending transactions. For each dependency, its corresponding transactions must be
concurrent, otherwise, the preceding transaction would be committed. Due to the fact that the pending transactions are
concurrent and the absence of c-ww, the order switching can only happen between conﬂicting transactions with c-rw
or anti-rw. Their dependency order preserves despite being reordered (Lemma 3). Hence, the cyclic schedule remains
unserializable, as shown in Figure 7a.
However, a transaction schedule can be reordered to be serializable if there exists a cycle with one c-ww conﬂict
between pending transactions. Due to Lemma 4, their dependency order can be ﬂipped. We present this scenario in
Figure 7b, where a cyclic schedule formed by Txn1, Txn2 and Txn3 becomes serializable by switching the commit
order of Txn2 and Txn3, which exhibit c-ww dependency.
3.4 Fine-grained Concurrency Control
Theorem 2 states that a cyclic transaction schedule withoutc-ww among pending transactions can never be serializable
despite reordering. Based on this insight, we formulate the following three steps for ﬁne-grained concurrency control
in EOV blockchains.
• For a new transaction, we ﬁrst consider all dependencies, exceptc-ww, among all pending transactions (including
the new transaction). Then, we directly drop the new transaction if there is a dependency cycle.
• On block formation, we retrieve the pending transaction order that respects all the computed dependencies.
• Finally, we restore c-ww dependencies on pending transactions based on the retrieved schedule.
Note that c-ww dependency restoration is still necessary, as future unserializable transactions may encounter a cycle
with a c-ww dependency which involves committed transactions. But their commit as well as the dependency order is
already ﬁxed. However, the dependency graph still remains acyclic after the restoration.
We outline our ﬁne-grained concurrency control in Algorithms 1, 2, and 3, while the implementation details are
presented in Section 4. We use the notation A∪=B to represent the self-assignment with unionA :=A∪B. Here,
we argue that the topological sort in Algorithm 3 always has a solution since the transaction dependency graph G is
8
=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
A PREPRINT - MARCH 24, 2020
Algorithm 1: Contract simulation
Input: Contract invocation context.
Output:readset,writeset are simulation results,
b is the number of the block simulated on.
1 b := fetch the number of the last block;
2 readset,writeset := simulate the contract invocation on Blockb snapshot; // Section 4.2
Algorithm 2: On the arrival of a transaction
Data:G is the transaction dependency graph with nodesU and edgesV , andP is the pending transaction set.
Input:t is the transaction identiﬁer,b is the number of the block simulated on, andreadkeys,writekeys are
accessed keys during simulation.
Output:reorderable property oft.
1 dep := Computet’s dependency exceptc-ww amongP based onG,b,readkeys,writekeys ; // Section 4.3
2 reorderable :=true if no cycle is detected inG with respect todep, orfalse otherwise; // Section 4.4
3 ifreorderable then
4 P∪={t};
5 G.U∪={t};
6 G.V ∪=dep;
guaranteed to be acyclic by Algorithm 2. Even the sub-graph containing only the pending transactions,P , is a directed
acyclic graph and, hence, must have a topological order.
Compared to the reordering algorithm in Fabric++, ours is more ﬁne-grained because the unserializable transactions
are aborted before ordering and the remaining transactions are guaranteed to be serializable without being aborted.
Our reordering is no longer limited to a block’s scope. Another notable difference is that we determine the block
snapshot at the start of the simulation, while Fabric and Fabric++ determine it based on the last read operation. We
allow block commit during the contract simulation for more parallelism, but this may introduce stale snapshots when
previously read records are updated by committed transactions during the simulation.
3.5 Security Analysis
Our reordering algorithm serves as a part of the ordering process and needs to be replicated on each honest orderer to
form the ledger after the consensus service has established the transaction order. We assume the safety and liveness
of the original consensus service under its security model, either crash-failure or byzantine-failure. We now discuss
whether both properties preserve after our reordering.
Safety. In the original Fabric design, there are four safety properties: agreement, hash chain integrity, no skipping ,
and no creation [4]. These properties require honest orderers to sequentially deliver consistent, untampered blocks in
a ledger. We claim that our approach preserves hash chain integrity and no skipping as we do not change the block
formation procedure. Next, no creation holds because we do not introduce new transactions. Lastly, we achieve
agreement because we fully replicate the reordering on each orderer. Moreover, we do not introduce non-determinism
which may lead to execution bifurcation. As long as honest orderers perform the reordering individually from a
consistent transaction stream, they shall produce identical ledgers.
Liveness. Fabric deﬁnes liveness in terms of the validity property, which mandates all broadcasted transactions to be
included in the ledger. Our algorithm may compromise this liveness property as aborted transactions are excluded from
the ledger. However, we propose the following approach to prevent abusive usage. To be speciﬁc, in the consensus
protocol, the transaction order is tentatively proposed by a leader node. When this order is accepted by the other
nodes, it becomes the input of our reordering approach. Hence, the order is controlled by the leader, which may hinge
on the publicly available reordering algorithm to maliciously defer certain transactions. Suppose the malicious leader
detects an undesirable transaction TxnT which reads and writes a record against the state snapshot of block N. The
leader, using both a proxy peer and a proxy client, can immediately prepare another transaction TxnT’ which reads
and writes the same record against block N. Next, the leader places TxnT’ ahead of TxnT during ordering. The other
orderers, unaware of this manipulation, may accept this ordering. Assuming TxnT’ passes the reorderability test in
Algorithm 2, each honest orderer will abort TxnT. It is because these two transactions form an unreorderable cyclic
schedule, namely TxnT’ depends on TxnT with c-rw and TxnT on TxnT’ with anti-rw. The crux of the mitigation is
to hide the transaction’s details, such as accessed records, before the transaction order is established. For example,
9
=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
A PREPRINT - MARCH 24, 2020
Algorithm 3: On the formation of a block
Data:G is the transaction dependency graph, andP is the pending transaction set.
Output:s is the commit order of pending transactions.
1 s := Topologically sortP based on reachability inG;
2 ww := Compute c-ww amongP withs;
3 G.V ∪=ww; // Section 4.5
4 P :=∅
Enqueue Txn in Pending Queue
Wait for Txn from Consensus
Reach the Block Formation 
Condition?
Algorithm 3: Reorder before Block Formation
Form the Block from Pending Txns & 
Empty the Queue
Deliver the Block to Peers
YES
NO
Is this Txn Reorderable by 
Algorithm 2?
YES
NOAlgorithm 1
Endorser
Orderer
Peer
Execute
Order
Validate
No Concurrecny 
Validation
Figure 8: The integration of our approach in the ordering service
we allow clients to send only the transaction hash to the orderers. Moreover, clients have incentives to do so to avoid
the above manipulation. After the sequence of a transaction hash is decided, its details are then disclosed to orderers
for reordering. We remark that this approach also defers malicious clients from exploiting the reordering by mutating
the transaction contents. It is because clients have already made a security commitment by publishing the transaction
hash.
4 Implementation
4.1 Overview
We illustrate in Figure 8 the integration of our proposed ﬁne-grained concurrency control in the ordering service of
an EOV blockchain. In particular, we implemented our approach on top of both Hyperledger Fabric and FastFabric.
For simplicity, we only show a single orderer and a single peer in the EOV pipeline, but the algorithms are replicated
on each node. While the majority of our implementation is done in orderers, Algorithm 1 is integrated in the peers
for snapshot-consistent transaction execution during the endorsement phase. In the ordering phase, we employ Algo-
rithm 2 to test the reorderability of an incoming transaction after the consensus decides its commit order. Algorithm 3
performs the abort-free reordering immediately before pending transactions are batched into a block. We remark that
Algorithm 2 and Algorithm 3 are far from implementation-friendly to system developers, as both employ an abstract
dependency graph. In light of this, we present the details of designing the dependency graph and efﬁcient operations
on it.
4.2 Snapshot Read
We ﬁrst describe the snapshot mechanism used by Algorithm 1. We rely on the storage snapshot mechanism to ensure
each contract invocation is simulated against a consistent state. Speciﬁcally, after a block is committed, we create
a storage snapshot and associate it with the block number. Each transaction, before its simulation, must acquire
the number of the latest block, as shown in Algorithm 1. Staled snapshots without any simulation are periodically
pruned. This design allows more parallelism across contract simulation in the Execution phase and block commit in
the Validation phase. In contrast, vanilla Fabric uses a read-write lock to coordinate these two phases.
10
=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
A PREPRINT - MARCH 24, 2020
4.3 Dependency Resolution
To compute the dependency graph in Algorithm 2, we introduce two multi-versioned storages in the orderers to identify
committed transactions. These storages are implemented in LevelDB and represent CommittedWriteTxns (CW) and
CommittedReadTxns (CR), respectively. Each key of CW consists of the concatenation of the record key and the
commit sequence of the transaction updating the value. For example, if Txn1 with commit sequence (3, 2) writes to
key A, CW has an entry{A 3 2 : Txn1}. Similarly, each key of CR consists of the concatenation of the record key
and the commit sequence of the transaction reading that key’s latest value. For instance, the entry {A 4 1 : Txn7}
indicates that Txn7 is the ﬁrst transaction in block 4 which reads the latest value of key A. In both CW and CR, we
place the record key prior to the commit sequence to efﬁciently support point query and range query. For example,
the query CW .Before (key,seq ) returns the last committed transaction updating key with the commit sequence
earlier thanseq. Similarly,CW .Last(key) returns the last committed transaction updatingkey. For the range query,
CW [key][seq :] returns all committed transactions fromseq onward that updatekey.
We maintain two in-memory indices, PendingWriteTxns (PW ) and PendingReadTxns (PR ), to respectively
store the keys for the write and read sets of pending transactions. Consider a new transaction txn that starts at
startTS with read keysR and write keysW . All the dependencies of transactiontxn are computed as follows.
anti-rw(txn) = ⋃
r∈RCW [r][startTS :]∪PW [r]
rw(txn) = ⋃
w∈WCR[w]∪PR [w]
n-wr(txn) = ⋃
r∈RCW.Before (r,startTS )
ww(txn) = ⋃
w∈WCW.Last(w)
Note that we ignore ww dependencies between pending transactions and do not differentiate whether ww and rw are
concurrent or not. This is because non-concurrent transaction may be part of a cycle. We then compute the predecessor
transactions oftxn as ww(txn)∪ n-wr(txn)∪ rw(txn), and successor transactions as anti-rw(txn).
4.4 Cycle Detection
We now discuss how we represent the dependency graph G to detect cycles and achieve serializability. We face two
design choices. On the one hand, we could maintain only the immediate linkage information for each transaction
and then perform graph traversal for cycle detection. On the other hand, we could maintain the entire reachability
information among each pair of transactions. But the latter approach shifts the overhead from computation to space
consumption. We achieve a sweet spot by maintaining the immediate successors of a transaction ( txn.succ) and
represent all transactions that can reach txn with a bloom ﬁlter, referred to as txn.anti reachable. Cycle detec-
tion becomes straightforward by testing p.anti reachable(s) for each pair (p,s ) consisting of a predecessor and a
successor oftxn.
We use bloom ﬁlters because they are memory efﬁcient and can perform fast union. Union is extensively used to
update the reachability information for each transaction, as shown in Algorithm 4. Since a bloom ﬁlter internally
relies on a bit vector, the set union can be fast computed via the bitwise OR operation. However, bloom ﬁlters are
known to report false positives [8]. If the ﬁlters report such false positives for a pair of adjacent transactions to txn,
we preventively aborttxn. If they report negative for all pairs, thentxn does not belong to any cycle inG.
Algorithm 4 entails the relatively expensive traversal of all reachable transactions from txn. However, this cost is
bearable, since the traversal is unnecessary when anti-rw(txn) is empty. This is often the case under non-skewed
workloads. Moreover, we reduce the cost of traversal by pruning the dependency graph, as described in Section 4.6.
Another issue in Algorithm 4 is the constant growth of theanti reachable ﬁlter. In practice, we observe that the false
positive rate of a single bloom ﬁlter grows to an intolerable ratio. To address this issue, we use two bloom ﬁlters with
relay. Each transaction is associated with one bloom ﬁlter capturing transactions committed after blockM and another
bloom ﬁlter capturing transactions after block N. Suppose block C is the earliest block which contains a committed
transaction inG. We maintainM <C <N and use the ﬁrst bloom ﬁlter for testing reachability. Whenever C grows
toM < N < C, the ﬁrst bloom ﬁlter is emptied and it starts to collect transactions from the current block. We then
use the second ﬁlter for testing reachability. In this manner, we restrict the number of transactions represented by a
bloom ﬁlter within a certain block range so that the false positive rate remains acceptable. For safety, honest orderers
must use the sameM andN for exact replication.
11
=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
A PREPRINT - MARCH 24, 2020
Algorithm 4: Reachability update for transactiontxn
Data:G is the transaction dependency graph
Input:M is the number of next block to be committed,pred istxn’s immediate predecessor transactions, and
succ istxn’s immediate successor transactions.
1 txn.anti reachable :=∅;
2 forp inpred do
3 p.succ ∪={txn};
4 txn.anti reachable ∪=p.anti reachable;
5 fors reachabale fromsucc inG do
6 s.anti reachable ∪=txn.anti reachable;
7 s.age :=M;
Algorithm 5: Restoration of ww within pending transactions based on the computed commit sequence
Data:G is transaction dependency graph.
Input:seq is committed sequence of pending transactions,PW is the index that associates updated keys with
pending transactions.
1 head txns :=∅;
2 for (key,txns ) inPW do
3 Sorttxns based on the relative order inseq;
4 (txn1,txn 2) := the ﬁrst pair intxns such thattxn1 /∈txn2.anti reachable;
5 txn2.anti reachable ∪=txn1.anti reachable;
6 head txns ∪={txn2};
7 fortxn in the topologically-ordered iteration of all txns reachable fromhead txns do
8 fort intxn.succ do
9 t.anti reachable ∪=txn.anti reachable;
4.5 Dependency Restoration
Next, we present our method to install ww dependencies into the dependency graph G based on the derived commit
sequence, which is a topological order of the pending transactionsP according to the reachability inG. One prominent
issue is that the reachability of a transaction may be affected by multipleww dependencies from various updated keys.
But we want the reachability modiﬁcation to take place within a single iteration for efﬁciency. Algorithm 5 outlines
the major steps of the restoration ofww dependencies. We further explain this algorithm using the example in Figure 9.
For eachkey to be updated by pending transactions (PW ), we topologically sort its associated transactions and select
the ﬁrst pair that is not yet connected in the reachability ﬁlter. In such a pair, the second transaction can be reached
from all the predecessors of the ﬁrst transaction. There can be a scenario where transactions in a pair are already
connected in the reachability ﬁlter, which makes the restoration redundant. For example, this happens with Txn0 and
Txn3 in Figure 9. For transactions that are not yet connected, we need to update their successors. To do this efﬁciently,
we keep the transactions in a set (head txns) and update their successors based on the topological order. Thereby, we
avoid updating the information multiple times during the iteration in line 2. For example,Txn8 in Figure 9 is reachable
through the update of both key A and B. Using our algorithm, the reachability information is updated once.
4.6 Dependency Graph Pruning
Since graphG can grow quickly, we prune transactions that either (i) are simulated against very old snapshots or (ii)
cannot affect pending transactions. For the ﬁrst case, we introduce a parameter called max span to limit the block
span2 for a transaction. If the number of the next block is M, we compute the snapshot threshold as H = M−
max span. Any transaction simulated against blockH or earlier is aborted. For the second case, we deﬁne the age of
a transactiontxn to be the sequence number of the last committed block containing at least one transaction reachable
from txn in G. When the snapshot threshold is greater than txn’s age, future transactions cannot be concurrent
with any transaction that can reach txn. In this case, the anti-rw dependency will not happen, and this rules out any
unserializable schedule containing txn. Therefore, txn can be safely pruned from G. We facilitate the pruning by
arranging all transactions in G into a priority queue weighted by age. For new transaction to be committed in block
2If a transaction is simulated against block M and committed in block M + 1, its block span is 1.
12
=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
A PREPRINT - MARCH 24, 2020
Txn1: 1
Txn2: 4 Txn6: 4
Txn3: 4
Txn4: 4
Txn5: 4
Txn7: 4
Txn8: 4 Txn9: 4
Txn0: 4
......
Commit Sequence: 
  Txn0 -> Txn3 -> Txn5 
  -> Txn7 -> Txn4
New ww: 
Key A: Txn5 => Txn4
Key B: Txn0 -> 
            Txn3 => Txn7
Iteration Order: 
Txn7 -> Txn4 ->Txn9 
         -> Txn8
Figure 9: Example of a dependency graph with pending transactions (marked with blue dashed border), the commit
sequence, new ww dependencies (marked with blue solid line) and the topologically-sorted iteration order. We do not
consider the ww dependency between Txn0 and Txn3 (marked with blue dotted line), as it is implicit. Txn1 in red is
subject to pruning due to staleness. The transaction age is in italic.
M, we increase the age of the transactions reachable from it to M during the traversal in Algorithm 4 (line 7). For
security, all orderers must use the same value formax span.
5 Experiments
5.1 Systems and Setup
First, we implement our approach on top of Hyperledger Fabric 1.3 and name the resulting system FabricSharp.
We compare FabricSharp with the vanilla Fabric [4], Fabric++ [26], and two new systems which we developed by
directly adopting OCC techniques from databases to Fabric. The ﬁrst system, which we call Focc-s, follows the
standard serializable OCC approach in [10]. This approach considers a dangerous pattern formed by two consecutive
concurrent read-write conﬂicts with at least one anti-rw. We modify our Algorithm 2 such that incoming transactions
with a c-ww conﬂict or a dangerous pattern are immediately aborted. Focc-s does nothing on block formation. The
second system is Focc-l, which uses a recent OCC technique [12], based upon which we construct the read-write
dependency graph and apply itsSort-Based Greedy Algorithm in Algorithm 3 for reordering. Focc-l does not ﬁlter any
transactions in Algorithm 2.
Second, we implement our ﬁne-grained concurrency control on top of FastFabric [20], an orthogonal Fabric improve-
ment, and name the resulting systemFastFabricSharp. We aim to investigate the performance of FastFabricSharp on a
real production workload with low contention. In both sets of experiments, we deploy twoorderers, three Kafka nodes
and four peers, each on a physical machine with Intel Xeon E5-1650 3.5GHz CPU and 32GB RAM. The machines
are connected via 1Gb Ethernet. We conﬁgure the smart contract to be endorsed (executed) by a single peer. Any of
the four peers can serve as the endorser to spread the workload. The experiments are run at least three times and the
average values are reported.
5.2 Workloads and Benchmark Driver
We use the same workloads that evaluate Fabric++ [26], which are based on the Smallbank benchmark. A transaction
reads and writes 4 bank accounts, respectively, out of 10k accounts. We set 1% of them as hot accounts. Each
read has a certain probability to access the hot accounts, controlled by the Read hot ratio parameter. Similarly,
writing to hot accounts is controlled by the Write hot ratio . We introduce two more workload parameters, namely
Client Delay and Read Interval. The former controls the delay of a client’s broadcast to orderer after it receives the
execution results from a peer. This parameter simulates the network transmission delay at the client side. The latter
simulates computation-heavy transactions by controlling the interval between consecutive reads. Table 2 tabulates all
the parameters, with the default value underlined. We ﬁx max span to 10 and the request rate to 700 tps. This is
because Fabric can sustain a maximum raw throughput of around 700 tps on our setup, as shown in Figure 1. Unless
otherwise speciﬁed, all reported throughputs denote the effective throughput, which represents the transactions that
pass the serializability check and persist their states.
5.3 The Performance of FabricSharp
Block Size. We ﬁrst determine the block size that leads to the highest throughput for each system, and use these
sizes for the remainder of the experiments. Figure 10 shows that the highest throughput (542 tps) is achieved by
FabricSharp when the block size is set to 100 transactions. In contrast, Fabric, Fabric++, Focc-s and Focc-l reach
13
=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
A PREPRINT - MARCH 24, 2020
Table 2: Experiment parameters
Parameter Value
# of transactions per block 50, 100, 200 , 300, 400, 500
Write hot ratio (%) 0, 10 , 20, 30, 40, 50
Read hot ratio (%) 0, 10 , 20, 30, 40, 50
Client delay (x100 ms) 0 , 1 ,2 ,3, 4, 5
Read interval (x10 ms) 0 , 4, 8, 12, 16, 20
50 100 200 300 400 500
# of txns per block
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
tps
Throughput
Fabric
Fabric++
Fabric#
Focc-s
Focc-l
50 100 200 300 400 500
# of txns per block
0
1
2
3
4
5 sec
Latency
Fabric
Fabric++
Fabric#
Focc-s
Focc-l
Figure 10: Performance under varying block size
their peak performance, 411, 437, 327, and 415 tps, respectively, when a block is limited to 200, 200, 200, and
400 transactions, respectively. Hence, our FabricSharp achieves 25% improvement in throughput compared to the
state-of-the-art Fabric++.
Contrary to our expectation, Fabric++ does not achieve higher throughput with larger blocks, even though there are
more transactions available for reordering. We attribute it to the longer latency that intensiﬁes the contention, lead-
ing to more unserializable transactions. On the one hand, it takes longer to form a block. On the other hand, the
reordering before block formation requires more time because there are more transactions. For example, we observe
that reordering in Fabric++ takes 4.3ms with 50 transactions per block and 401ms with 500 transactions per block.
In contrast, Focc-l takes 0.12ms and 5.19ms, respectively, due to its light-weight approach, even though it similarly
constructs a dependency graph. This explains why Focc-l has shorter delay and performs better on larger blocks. But
when the block size is smaller than 200, the throughput of both FabricSharp and Focc-s is signiﬁcantly higher com-
pared to Fabric, Fabric++, and Focc-l. It is because of the preventive abort applied by both FabricSharp and Focc-s
during the Ordering phase before reordering. This alleviates the congestion in the Validation phase, which is the bot-
tleneck. In contrast, Fabric, Fabric++, and Focc-l exhibit high latency with smaller blocks because many unserializable
transactions are included in the ledger and they overload the Validation phase.
Write Hot Ratio. To evaluate the effect of write-write conﬂicts, we concentrate more write operations into a ﬁxed
number of hot accounts. The throughput of FabricSharp remains the highest among all the systems, as shown in
Figure 11 (left). As expected, the throughput of Focc-s drops signiﬁcantly due to its prevention on c-ww. We also
observe that the reordering latency of Fabric++ is constantly large, while this delay in Focc-l is smaller and proportional
to the increasing skewness. This is because Focc-l iterates through the dependency graph of pending transactions in
rounds. In each round, its Sort-Based Greedy Algorithm keeps pruning transactions until there are only transactions
without dependencies. In contrast, Fabric++ computes all the cycles and determines the transactions to be aborted in
batch mode. Hence, its reordering procedure is less sensitive to workload skewness compared to Focc-l. Figure 11
shows that the reordering latency in FabricSharp (Algorithm 3) is low. This is because FabricSharp shifts most of the
work (e.g., the dependency graph maintenance) to Algorithm 2 on the transaction arrival. We notice that a large ratio
(˜50%) of the reordering delay in FabricSharp is for the restoration of ww conﬂicts, and this ratio increases with higher
write hot ratio.
Read Hot Ratio. We increase the read hot ratio to generate more read-write conﬂicts in the workload. As explained
in Theorem 2, dependency cycles with these conﬂicts can never be reordered to become serializable. Consistent to
our explanation, we show in Figure 12 that the throughput of all the systems, except Focc-s, decreases at a similar
rate. The throughput of Focc-s is greater compared to Fabric and Focc-l when 50% of the read requests are on the hot
14
=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
A PREPRINT - MARCH 24, 2020
0 10 20 30 40 50
Write hot ratio (%)
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
tps
Throughput
Fabric
Fabric++
Fabric#
Focc-s
Focc-l
0 10 20 30 40 50
Write hot ratio (%)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
ms
Reorder Latency
Compute order
Restore ww
Persist to storage
Prune G
Focc-l
Fabric++
Fabric#
Figure 11: Throughput and reordering latency under varying write hot ratio
0 10 20 30 40 50
Read hot ratio (%)
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
tps
Throughput
Fabric
Fabric++
Fabric#
Focc-s
Focc-l
0 10 20 30 40 50
Read hot ratio (%)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
us
Txn Process Latency
Identify conflict
Update graph
Index record
Focc-s
Fabric++
Fabric#
Figure 12: Throughput and transaction processing latency under varying read hot ratio
accounts. This is because Focc-s imposes a more stringent condition for serializability compared to Fabric and Focc-l.
Focc-s aborts transactions if they are forming two consecutive read-write conﬂicts with at least one anti-rw, while the
other systems, except FabricSharp, abort immediately when there is a single anti-rw. Hence, Focc-s can recover more
serializable transactions especially under heavy read-write contention. Figure 12 (right) shows the processing latency
breakdown for an incoming transaction. As expected, the reachability update on the dependency graph takes the largest
proportion of the delay in FabricSharp, as all the reachable transactions from the incoming one must be traversed. This
overhead increases with more dependencies in the workload. Compared to FabricSharp, the transaction processing
delay in Focc-s and Fabric++ is almost negligible. However, Focc-s takes a bit longer than Fabric++, as it needs to
additionally identify conﬂicted transactions, instead of only indexing the transactions based on the accessed records
as in Fabric++.
Client Delay. Next, we simulate the network transmission latency at the client side, in order to study its impact on
a transaction’s end-to-end processing. Using the client delay parameter, we introduce a delay between the Execution
and Ordering phases. As expected, a longer client delay increases the end-to-end latency and the block span of a
transaction. In turn, this leads to lower throughput, as show in Figure 13 (left). Moreover, a larger block span leads
to more concurrent transactions and more dependencies. As shown in Figure 13 (right), FabricSharp traverses more
transactions in the dependency graph to update their reachability (Algorithm 2) when the client delay is higher. Despite
this, FabricSharp performs better than all the other systems.
Read Interval. To simulate the scenario where a transaction incurs heavy computations, we increase the interval
between consecutive reads during the transaction execution. When a transaction takes longer to execute, there is a
higher probability to read across blocks. Fabric++ prevents this scenario by aborting transactions that read across
blocks even though some may be serializable. This is evidenced by a larger proportion of transactions that are early
aborted during the Execution phase, as shown in Figure 14 (right). Focc-s consistently reads from a valid block
snapshot and, hence, the effect of extending a transaction’s execution results in a higher end-to-end latency. This leads
to more concurrent transactions which, in turn, results in a higher abort rate for both c-ww and the dangerous pattern
15
=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
A PREPRINT - MARCH 24, 2020
0 100 200 300 400 500
Client delay (ms)
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
tps
Throughput
Fabric
Fabric++
Fabric#
Focc-s
Focc-l
0 100 200 300 400 500
Client delay (ms)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Fabric# Statistics
0
2
4
6
8
10
# of hops (left axis)
Txn blk span (right axis)
Figure 13: Throughput of all systems (left) and statistics of FabricSharp (right) under varying client delay
0 40 80 120 160 200
Read interval (ms)
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
tps
Throughput
Fabric
Fabric++
Fabric#
Focc-s
Focc-l
0 40 80 120 160 200
Read interval (ms)
0
25
50
75
100
%
Abort Rate
Concurrent-ww
2 consecutive rw
Simulation abort
Others
Focc-s
Fabric++
Fabric#
Figure 14: Throughput (left) and abort rate (right) under varying read interval
in Focc-s. Notably, the performance of the vanilla Fabric drops drastically with longer transaction execution. We
attribute this to the read-write lock used during the simulation and block commit which prevents parallelism.
5.4 The Performance of FastFabricSharp
Next, we analyze the performance of our approach on top of FastFabric [16]. FastFabric separates peers in the same
administrative domain into endorser, storage, and validator nodes. Endorsers, storage nodes, and validators are solely
responsible for the transaction execution, block persistence, and transactions validation, respectively. These optimiza-
tions enable FastFabric to obtain a speedup of 6 compared to vanilla Fabric, as reported in [16].
We implement our reordering techniques on top of FastFabric and name the resulting system FastFabricSharp. In
our experimental setup of four peers, we set two peers as endorsers, one as storage, and one as validator. We use
two workloads based on the original Smallbank to evaluate the effectiveness of our approach when the workloads
exhibit less conﬂicts compared to the modiﬁed Smallbank used in the previous set of experiments. The ﬁrst workload
consists of uniform update-only transactions ( Create Account), which are all serializable due to the absence of read
operations and hence anti-rw. The second workload is a mix of 50% read-only transactions ( Query Account), 30%
transactions that modify a single account (Deposit Checking, Write Check, Transaction Saving), and 20% transactions
that modify two accounts ( Send Payment, Amalgamate). The skewness of the accessed accounts is controlled by the
zipﬁan parameterθ.
Figure 15 reports the comparison between FastFabric and FastFabricSharp. With the contention-free Create Account
workload, FastFabric achieves a speedup of 4.5 on our experimental setup compared to the original Fabric, namely
3114 tps versus 677 tps in terms of raw throughput. The reordering overhead in FastFabricSharp is less than 5% and
its effective throughput achieves 2960 tps. Under the mixed workload, FastFabricSharp achieves higher throughput
compared to FastFabric. Moreover, the gap between FastFabricSharp and FastFabric grows with increasing skewness.
When the θ = 1 , FastFabricSharp can achieve 2370 tps, 66% more than the 1424 tps of FastFabric. The gain of
16
=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
A PREPRINT - MARCH 24, 2020
Create
Account
0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1
Zipfian coefficient  (Mixed Workload)
0
1000
2000
3000
tps
Effective Throughput
FastFabric FastFabric#-others
FastFabric#-antiRW
Figure 15: Effective throughput of FastFabric and FastFabricSharp under the contention-free ( Create Account) and
mixed workload
FastFabricSharp is mostly from the serialized transactions with anti-rw, as highlighted in Figure 15, which are all
aborted by FastFabric.
We conclude that the beneﬁts of our reordering outweigh the computation overhead, even under a heavy load. From
previous experiments, this overhead is mostly due to reachability update, which depends on the transaction complexity.
In practice, if our reordering becomes the bottleneck, we could simply adopt a discriminated approach. For example,
complex transactions with more referenced records can be checked with a simple serializability condition, e.g., the
existence of anti-rw conﬂicts. On the other hand, simple transactions are passed to the ﬁne-grained reordering.
6 Related Work
Concurrency Control in Databases. Modern hardware with large memory and multi-core architecture opens up new
opportunities for redesigning OLTP RDBMSs and their concurrency control [19]. Various works have attempted to
either make data access more cache-friendly [35, 28] or extract more execution parallelism [34, 32]. Others strove
to streamline the transaction ordering based on workload characteristics and application requirements [17, 12, 29].
Our work is closer to the latter approach, but we focus on blockchain systems. In particular, we learn from the
standardized transactional analysis techniques in databases and propose a novel technique to efﬁciently reduce the
number of aborted transactions in EOV blockchains.
Concurrency Control in Blockchains.The serial execution of smart contracts has long been the only solution adopted
by blockchains due to ease of reasoning. Fabric, with its novel EOV architecture, is the pioneer system which formally
introduced concurrency management into blockchains. It sparked a series of related optimizations, such as Fabric++
[26], and enhanced architectures, like OXII [3]. Fabric++ is the closest work to ours. It also aims to reduce the number
of aborted transactions under EOV architecture. However, our approach provides a more ﬁne-grained concurrency
control which can still serialize transactions aborted by Fabric++.
Bridging the Gap between Database and Blockchain Transactions.Similarities between blockchains and databases
have long been observed in their surveys [24, 13] and benchmarks [14]. There are several works addressing the
atomicity of cross-chain or cross-shard transactions in blockchains, by transitioning the well-established database
techniques, such as the classic Two Phase Commit [18, 36, 11]. Nathan et al. propose to implement blockchains on top
of databases to rely on their store procedures for richer contract expressiveness [23]. Smart contract, as a key enabler
for the transactional workload in blockchains, is extensively optimized for better utility with lineage information [25]
or conﬁdentiality across applications [2].
7 Conclusions
We propose a novel solution to efﬁciently reduce the transaction abort rate in EOV blockchains by applying trans-
actional analysis from OCC databases. We ﬁrst draw a theoretical parallelism between EOV blockchains and OCC
databases. Then, we propose a ﬁne-grained concurrency control method and implement it in FabricSharp and Fast-
FabricSharp based on Fabric and FastFabric, respectively. Our experimental analysis shows that both FabricSharp and
FastFabricSharp outperform other blockchain systems, including the vanilla Fabric, Fabric++, and FastFabric. Unlike
databases that achieve high throughput, the blockchains’ limited throughput due to factors related to security opens up
opportunities for precise transaction management.
17
=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
A PREPRINT - MARCH 24, 2020
8 Acknowledgements
This research is supported by Singapore Ministry of Education Academic Research Fund Tier 3 under MOE’s ofﬁcial
grant number MOE2017-T3-1-007.
References
[1] Fabricsharp: an enhanced variant of hyperledger fabric. https://github.com/ooibc88/FabricSharp.
[2] M. J. Amiri, D. Agrawal, and A. E. Abbadi. Caper: a cross-application permissioned blockchain. Proceedings
of the VLDB Endowment, 12(11):1385–1398, 2019.
[3] M. J. Amiri, D. Agrawal, and A. E. Abbadi. Parblockchain: Leveraging transaction parallelism in permissioned
blockchain systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.01457, 2019.
[4] E. Androulaki, A. Barger, V . Bortnikov, C. Cachin, K. Christidis, A. De Caro, D. Enyeart, C. Ferris, G. Lavent-
man, Y . Manevich, et al. Hyperledger fabric: a distributed operating system for permissioned blockchains. In
Proceedings of the Thirteenth EuroSys Conference, page 30. ACM, 2018.
[5] P. Bailis, A. Davidson, A. Fekete, A. Ghodsi, J. M. Hellerstein, and I. Stoica. Highly available transactions:
Virtues and limitations. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 7(3):181–192, 2013.
[6] F. Benhamouda, S. Halevi, and T. T. Halevi. Supporting private data on hyperledger fabric with secure multiparty
computation. IBM Journal of Research and Development, 2019.
[7] H. Berenson, P. Bernstein, J. Gray, J. Melton, E. O’Neil, and P. O’Neil. A critique of ansi sql isolation levels.
ACM SIGMOD Record, 24(2):1–10, 1995.
[8] B. H. Bloom. Space/time trade-offs in hash coding with allowable errors. Communications of the ACM ,
13(7):422–426, 1970.
[9] M. A. Bornea, O. Hodson, S. Elnikety, and A. Fekete. One-copy serializability with snapshot isolation under the
hood. In 2011 IEEE 27th International Conference on Data Engineering, pages 625–636. IEEE, 2011.
[10] M. J. Cahill, U. R ¨ohm, and A. D. Fekete. Serializable isolation for snapshot databases. In Proceedings of the
ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, SIGMOD 2008, Vancouver, BC, Canada,
June 10-12, 2008, pages 729–738, 2008.
[11] H. Dang, T. T. A. Dinh, D. Loghin, E.-C. Chang, Q. Lin, and B. C. Ooi. Towards scaling blockchain systems via
sharding. In Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Management of Data, pages 123–140. ACM,
2019.
[12] B. Ding, L. Kot, and J. Gehrke. Improving optimistic concurrency control through transaction batching and
operation reordering. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 12(2):169–182, 2018.
[13] T. T. A. Dinh, R. Liu, M. Zhang, G. Chen, B. C. Ooi, and J. Wang. Untangling blockchain: A data processing
view of blockchain systems. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 30(7):1366–1385, 2018.
[14] T. T. A. Dinh, J. Wang, G. Chen, R. Liu, B. C. Ooi, and K.-L. Tan. Blockbench: A framework for analyzing
private blockchains. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM International Conference on Management of Data, pages
1085–1100. ACM, 2017.
[15] A. Fekete, D. Liarokapis, E. O’Neil, P. O’Neil, and D. Shasha. Making snapshot isolation serializable. ACM
Transactions on Database Systems (TODS), 30(2):492–528, 2005.
[16] C. Gorenﬂo, S. Lee, L. Golab, and S. Keshav. Fastfabric: Scaling hyperledger fabric to 20,000 transactions per
second. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.00910, 2019.
[17] J. Guo, P. Cai, J. Wang, W. Qian, and A. Zhou. Adaptive optimistic concurrency control for heterogeneous
workloads. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 12(5):584–596, 2019.
[18] M. Herlihy, B. Liskov, and L. Shrira. Cross-chain deals and adversarial commerce. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.09743, 2019.
[19] R. Kallman, H. Kimura, J. Natkins, A. Pavlo, A. Rasin, S. Zdonik, E. P. Jones, S. Madden, M. Stonebraker,
Y . Zhang, et al. H-store: a high-performance, distributed main memory transaction processing system.Proceed-
ings of the VLDB Endowment, 1(2):1496–1499, 2008.
[20] H.-T. Kung and J. T. Robinson. On optimistic methods for concurrency control. ACM Transactions on Database
Systems (TODS), 6(2):213–226, 1981.
18
=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
A PREPRINT - MARCH 24, 2020
[21] S. Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system, 2008.
[22] Q. Nasir, I. A. Qasse, M. Abu Talib, and A. B. Nassif. Performance analysis of hyperledger fabric platforms.
Security and Communication Networks, 2018, 2018.
[23] S. Nathan, C. Govindarajan, A. Saraf, M. Sethi, and P. Jayachandran. Blockchain meets database: Design and
implementation of a blockchain relational database. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 12(11):1539–1552,
2019.
[24] P. Ruan, G. Chen, T. T. A. Dinh, Q. Lin, D. Loghin, B. C. Ooi, and M. Zhang. Blockchains and distributed
databases: a twin study. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01310, 2019.
[25] P. Ruan, G. Chen, T. T. A. Dinh, Q. Lin, B. C. Ooi, and M. Zhang. Fine-grained, secure and efﬁcient data
provenance on blockchain systems. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 12(9):975–988, 2019.
[26] A. Sharma, F. M. Schuhknecht, D. Agrawal, and J. Dittrich. Blurring the lines between blockchains and database
systems: the case of hyperledger fabric. In Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Management
of Data, pages 105–122. ACM, 2019.
[27] P. Thakkar, S. Nathan, and B. Viswanathan. Performance benchmarking and optimizing hyperledger fabric
blockchain platform. In 2018 IEEE 26th International Symposium on Modeling, Analysis, and Simulation of
Computer and Telecommunication Systems (MASCOTS), pages 264–276. IEEE, 2018.
[28] S. Tu, W. Zheng, E. Kohler, B. Liskov, and S. Madden. Speedy transactions in multicore in-memory databases.
In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles , pages 18–32. ACM,
2013.
[29] T. Wang and H. Kimura. Mostly-optimistic concurrency control for highly contended dynamic workloads on a
thousand cores. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 10(2):49–60, 2016.
[30] G. Weikum and G. V ossen. Transactional information systems: theory, algorithms, and the practice of concur-
rency control and recovery. Elsevier, 2001.
[31] G. Wood et al. Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised transaction ledger. Ethereum project yellow paper,
151(2014):1–32, 2014.
[32] Y . Wu, C.-Y . Chan, and K.-L. Tan. Transaction healing: Scaling optimistic concurrency control on multicores.
In Proceedings of the 2016 International Conference on Management of Data, pages 1689–1704. ACM, 2016.
[33] M. Yabandeh and D. G ´omez Ferro. A critique of snapshot isolation. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM european
conference on Computer Systems, pages 155–168. ACM, 2012.
[34] C. Yao, D. Agrawal, G. Chen, Q. Lin, B. C. Ooi, W.-F. Wong, and M. Zhang. Exploiting single-threaded model
in multi-core in-memory systems. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 28(10):2635–2650,
2016.
[35] X. Yu, Y . Xia, A. Pavlo, D. Sanchez, L. Rudolph, and S. Devadas. Sundial: harmonizing concurrency control and
caching in a distributed oltp database management system. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 11(10):1289–
1302, 2018.
[36] V . Zakhary, D. Agrawal, and A. E. Abbadi. Atomic commitment across blockchains. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.02847, 2019.
19