=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Fully Dynamic Set Cover via Hypergraph Maximal
Matching: An Optimal Approximation Through a
Local Approach
Sepehr Assadi ✉
Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA
Shay Solomon ✉
Tel Aviv University, Israel
Abstract
In the (fully) dynamic set cover problem, we have a collection ofm sets from a universe of sizen
that undergo element insertions and deletions; the goal is to maintain an approximate set cover
of the universe after each update. We give anO(f 2) update time algorithm for this problem that
achieves anf-approximation, wheref is the maximum number of sets that an element belongs
to; under the unique games conjecture, this approximation is best possible for any fixedf. This
is the first algorithm for dynamic set cover with approximation ratio thatexactly matchesf (as
opposed to almost f in prior work), as well as the first one with runtimeindependent of n,m (for
any approximation factor ofo(f 3)).
Prior to our work, the state-of-the-art algorithms for this problem wereO(f 2) update time
algorithms of Gupta et al.[STOC’17] and Bhattacharya et al.[IPCO’17] withO(f 3) approximation,
and the recent algorithm of Bhattacharya et al. [FOCS’19] withO(f· logn/ε2) update time and
(1 +ε)·f approximation, improving theO(f 2· logn/ε5) bound of Abboud et al. [STOC’19].
The key technical ingredient of our work is an algorithm for maintaining amaximal matching in
a dynamic hypergraph of rankr – where each hyperedge has at mostr vertices – that undergoes
hyperedge insertions and deletions inO(r2) amortized update time; our algorithm is randomized,
and the bound on the update time holds in expectation and with high probability. This result
generalizes the maximal matching algorithm of Solomon [FOCS’16] with constant update time in
ordinary graphs to hypergraphs, and is of independent merit; the previous state-of-the-art algorithms
for set cover do not translate to (integral) matchings for hypergraphs, let alone a maximal one. Our
quantitative result for the set cover problem is translated directly from this qualitative result for
maximal matching using standard reductions.
An important advantage of our approach over the previous ones for approximation(1 +ε)·f
(by Abboud et al. [STOC’19] and Bhattacharya et al. [FOCS’19]) is that it is inherentlylocaland
can thus be distributed efficiently to achieve low amortized round and message complexities.
2012 ACM Subject ClassificationTheory of computation→ Dynamic graph algorithms; Theory
of computation→ Graph algorithms analysis; Mathematics of computing→ Graph algorithms;
Mathematics of computing→ Approximation algorithms
Keywords and phrasesdynamic graph algorithms, hypergraph, maximal matching, matching, set
cover
Digital Object Identifier10.4230/LIPIcs.ESA.2021.8
Related Version Full Version: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2105.06889.pdf
Funding Sepehr Assadi: Research supported in part by a NSF CAREER Grant CCF-2047061, and
a gift from Google Research.
Shay Solomon: Partially supported by the Israel Science Foundation grant No.1991/19.
© Sepehr Assadi and Shay Solomon;
licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
29th Annual European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA 2021).
Editors: Petra Mutzel, Rasmus Pagh, and Grzegorz Herman; Article No.8; pp.8:1–8:18
Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
8:2 Fully Dynamic Set Cover via Hypergraph Maximal Matching
1 Introduction
In the set cover problem, we are given a familyS = (S1,...,S m) of m sets on a universe
[n]. The goal is to find a minimum-size subfamily of setsF⊆S such thatF covers all the
elements of [n]. Throughout the paper, we usef to denote the maximum frequency of any
elementi∈ [n] inside the sets inS (by frequency of elementi, we mean the number of sets
inS that containi).
The set cover problem is one of the most fundamental and well-studied NP-hard
problems, with two classic approximation algorithms, both with runtimeO(fn): greedy
lnn-approximation and primal-dualf-approximation. One cannot achieve approximation
(1−ε) lnn unless P = NP [26, 17] or approximationf−ε for any fixedf under the unique
games conjecture [20].
In recent years there is a growing body of work on this problem in the dynamic setting,
where one would like to efficiently maintain a set cover for a universe that is subject to
element insertions and deletions. The holy grail is to coincide with the bounds of the static
setting: approximation factor of eitherlnn or f with (amortized) update timeO(f) (as a
static runtime ofΘ(fn) means that we spendΘ(f) time per each element of the universe
on average). Indeed, in any dynamic model where element updates are explicit, update
time Ω(f) is inevitable. Even in stronger models where updates are supported implicitly in
constant time, recent SETH-based conditional lower bounds imply that update timeO(f 1−ε)
requires polynomial approximation factor [1].
The dynamic set cover problem was first studied by Gupta et al. [18] who gave an
O(logn)-approximation with update timeO(f logn) based on a greedy algorithm. The rest
of the known algorithms are primal-dual-based and their approximation factor depends only
on f. The state-of-the-art algorithms are: (1) AnO(f 3)-approximation withO(f 2) update
time, by Gupta et al.[18] and independently by Bhattacharya et al.[9], and (2) A (1 +ε)·f-
approximation with update timeO(f· logn/ε2) by Bhattacharya et al.[11], improving the
O(f 2· logn/ε5) bound of Abboud et al.[1] as well as an earlier result by Bhattacharya et
al.[10]. Interestingly, the state-of-the-art algorithms for this problem are alldeterministic
(the algorithm of [1] is randomized however).
Our Result
In this work we demonstrate the power of randomization for the dynamic set cover problem
by achieving the best possible approximation off with runtime independent of bothm,n:
▶Theorem (Informal). There is an algorithm for the dynamic set cover problem that achieves
an exact f-approximation inO(f 2) expected (and with high probability) amortized update
time.
This gives the first algorithm for dynamic set cover with approximation ratio thatexactly
matches f (as opposed toalmost f in prior work), as well as the first one with runtime
independent of n,m (for any approximation factor ofo(f 3)). The bound O(f 2) on the
update time of our algorithm holds with high probability and in expectation. As in [1] and
in the great majority of randomized dynamic graph algorithms, we assume an oblivious
adversary. We shall remark that even for the much simpler problem of dynamic vertex cover
(corresponding tof = 2 case), no algorithm is known against an adaptive adversary that
achieves an exact2-approximation in time independent of other input parameters (although
(2 +ε)-approximation algorithms have been known for some time now [13, 9, 6, 8]).
=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
S. Assadi and S. Solomon 8:3
Maximal Hypergraph Matching
The key technical ingredient of our work is an algorithm for maintaining amaximal matching
in a dynamic hypergraph of rankr – where each hyperedge has at mostr vertices – that
undergoes hyperedge insertions and deletions inO(r2) amortized update time. This result
generalizes the maximal matching algorithm of Solomon [25] with constant update time
for ordinary graphs, and is of independent merit; the previous state-of-the-art algorithms
for set cover do not translate to (integral) matchings for hypergraphs, let alone a maximal
one (however the algorithm of [1] translates to an integral (non-maximal) matching). The
result for set cover follows immediately from this: taking all the matched vertices in a
maximal hypergraph matching of rankf yields anf-approximate hypergraph vertex cover, or
equivalently, anf-approximate set cover; (see Section 2 for details of this standard reduction).
We stress that there is an inherent difference between a maximal matching (yielding exactly
f-approximation) and an almost-maximal matching (yielding(1 +ε)·f-approximation),
wherein anε-fraction of the potentially matched vertices may be unmatched; this is true in
general but particularly important in the dynamic setting. Despite extensive work on dynamic
algorithms for matching and vertex cover in ordinary graphs (f = 2), the state-of-the-art
deterministic algorithm (or even randomized against adaptive adversary) for 2-approximate
matching and vertex cover (via a maximal matching) has update timeO(
√
|E|) [21], while
(2+ε)-approximate matching and vertex cover can be maintained deterministically in poly-log
update time [6, 7]; for approximate vertex cover andfractional matching, the update time
can be further reduced toO(1/ε2) [13]. Therefore, it is only natural that our algorithm,
which achieves an integral maximal hypergraph matching, is randomized and assumes an
oblivious adversary.
Distributed networks
There is a growing body of work on distributed networks that change dynamically (cf.
[22, 24, 15, 3, 19, 14, 2]). A distributed network can be modeled as an undirected (hy-
per)graph G(V,E ), where each vertexv ∈ V is identified with a unique processor and
the edge setE corresponds to direct communication links between the processors. In a
static distributed setting all processors wake up simultaneously, and computation proceeds
in fault-free synchronous rounds during which every processor exchanges messages of size
O(logn) with its neighbors. We consider the standardCONGEST model (cf. [23]), which
captures the essence of spatial locality and congestion. For hypergraphs, the messages should
be of sizeO(logm), wherem is the number of edges in the graph.
We focus on the standard setting in dynamic graph algorithms – dynamically changing
networks that undergo edge updates (both insertions and deletions, a single edge update
per step), which initially contain no edges. But in adistributed network we are subject
to the followinglocal constraint: After each edge update, only the affected vertices – the
endpoints of the updated edge – are woken up; this is referred to in previous work as the
(CONGEST ) local wakeup model. Those affected vertices initiate an update procedure, which
also involves waking up the vertices in the network (beyond the affected ones) that are
required to participate in the update procedure, to adjust all outputs to agree on a valid
global solution – in our case a maximal hypergraph matching; the output of each vertex is
the set of its incident edges that belong to the matching. We make a standard assumption
that the edge updates occur in large enough time gaps, and hence the network is always
“stable” before the next change occurs (see, e.g., [22, 15, 3]). In this setting, the goal is to
optimize (1) the number of communication rounds, and (2) the number of messages, needed
for repairing the solution per edge update, over a worst-case sequence of edge updates.
ESA 2021
=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
8:4 Fully Dynamic Set Cover via Hypergraph Maximal Matching
Our dynamic maximal hypergraph matching algorithm can be naturally adapted to
distributed networks. Note that following an edge update, O(1) communication rounds
trivially suffice for updating a maximal hypergraph matching. However, the number of
messages sent per update via this naive algorithm may be a factor ofr2 greater than the
maximum degree in the hypergraph, which could beΩ(
(n
r−1
)
), wheren is the number of
vertices and r is the rank. An important objective is to design a dynamic distributed
algorithm that achieves, in addition to low round complexity, a lowmessage complexity. The
inclusion-maximality of our maintained matching enforces our algorithm to work persistently
so there is never any “slack”; that is, the algorithm makes sure that every edge that can be
added to the matching is added to it, which stands in contrast to “lazy” approximate-maximal
matching (or approximate set cover) algorithms, which may wait to accumulate anε-factor
additive slack in size or weight, and only then run an update procedure. However, such
a lazy update procedure is inherently non-local, where, following an edge updatee, the
required changes to the maintained graph structure may involve edges and vertices that
are arbitrarily far frome; indeed, this is the case with the previous algorithms that achieve
approximation factor close tof [11, 1]; moreover, the “lazy” feature of these algorithms must
rely on a centralized agent that orchestrates the update algorithm with the use of global
data structures, and this is, in fact, the key behind the efficiency of these algorithms [11, 1].
Our algorithm, on the other hand, does not employ any global update procedure or global
data structures, and as such it is inherentlylocaland can be easily distributed, so that the
average number of messages sent per update isO(r2), matching the sequential update time.
The number of rounds is clearly upper bounded by the number of messages. Refer to Section
9 in the full version [4] for more details.
Recent related work
Independently and concurrently to our work, Bhattacharya, Henzinger, Nanongkai, and Wu
[arXiv’20, SODA’21] obtained an algorithm for dynamic set cover withO(f 2/ε3) amortized
update time andO(f· log2n/ε3) worst case update time and(1 +ε)·f approximation.
While closely related, their results and ours are incomparable. Our algorithm can achieve a
better approximation ratio ofexactly f as opposed to(1 +ε)f (which is the first dynamic
algorithm with this guarantee) but is randomized, while their result is deterministic and can
work for weighted set cover (with extralogC-dependence on the update time whereC is
the maximum weight of any set). Also, as mentioned, our algorithm is inherently local and
can be distributed efficiently, whereas the algorithm of Bhattacharya et al., as the previous
aforementioned algorithms, is non-local. In terms of techniques, the two works are disjoint.
1.1 Technical overview
At a high level, all the previous state-of-the-art algorithms [18, 9, 11] (as well as the
independent work of [12]) follow a deterministic primal-dual approach by maintaining a
fractional packing solution as a dual certificate. The main advantage of this approach over
ours, of course, is in being deterministic, and its drawbacks are that (1) the approximation
factor is almostf rather than exactlyf, (2) it does not give rise to anintegral matching in
the context of hypergraphs, and (3) it is non-local.
Our algorithm generalizes and strengthens the maximal matching algorithm by Solomon
[25], which, in turn, builds on and refines the pioneering approach of Baswana et al.[5]. For
conciseness, we shall sometimes refer only to [25] in the following (to avoid explaining the
differences between [25] and [5]); of course, by that we do not mean to take any credit of [5],
on which [25] relies.
=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
S. Assadi and S. Solomon 8:5
Maximal matching algorithm of [5, 25]. Consider a deletion of a matched edge(u,v )
from the graph (forr = 2), which is the only nontrivial update. Focusing onu, ifu has
an unmatched neighbor, we need to matchu. To avoid a naive scan of the neighbors of
u (requiring O(n) time), the key idea is to matchu with a randomly sampled (possibly
matched) neighborw. Under the oblivious adversarial model, the expected number of edges
incident onu deleted from the graph before the deletion of edge(u,w ) is roughly half the
“sample space” size ofu, i.e., the number of neighbors ofu from which we sampledw, which
can be viewed as “time token” (or potential value) that is expected to arrive in the future.
To benefit from these tokens, [5, 25] introduces aleveling scheme where the levels of
vertices are exponentially smaller estimates of these potential values: Unmatched vertices
have level−1 and matched vertices are assigned the levels of their matched edge, which is
roughly the logarithm of the sample space size. This defines a dynamic hierarchical partition
of vertices intoO(logn) levels.
A key ingredient in the algorithm of [5, 25] is thesampling rule: A random matew is
chosen for a vertexu among its neighbors of strictly lower level. Intuitively, ifw’s level is
lower thanu’s, thenw’s potential value is much smaller thanu’s, and the newly created
matched edge (u,w ) provides enough potential value to cover the cost of deleting the old
matched edge onw (if any).
Difficulties of going from ordinary graphs to hypergraphs.The main difficulty of extending
the prior work in [5, 25] to hypergraphs of rankr >2 has to do with the “vertex-centric”
approach taken by these works [5, 25]. For instance, even at the definition level, it is already
unclear how to generalize the sampling rule of the algorithm for hypergraphs, even forr = 3,
since the hyperedges incident onu may consist of endpoints of various levels, some smaller
than that ofu, some higher. Ideally we would want to sample the matched hyperedge among
those whereall endpoints have lower level than that ofu, but it is a-priori unclear how to
maintain this hyperedge set efficiently. In particular, to perform the sampling rule efficiently,
the strategy of [25] is to dynamically orient each edge towards the lower level endpoint, and
a central obstacle is to efficiently cope with edges where both endpoints are at the same level.
For hypergraphs, naturally, these obstacles become more intricate considering there arer
different endpoints now.
There are also other hurdles that need to be carefully dealt with, such as the following.
Say a matched hyperedgee = (u1,...,u r) gets deleted from the hypergraph. Whenr = 2,
any edge incident onu1 is different than any edge incident onu2, hence informally the
update algorithm can handleu1 and u2 independently of each other. Whenr> 2 (even for
r = 3), different endpoints ofe may share (many) hyperedges in common. Therefore, when
choosing random matched hyperedges for the newly unmatched endpoints ofe, we need to
(i) be careful not to create conflicting matched hyperedges, but at the same time (ii) keep
the sample spaces of endpoints sufficiently large so that the potential values can cover the
runtime of the update procedure; balancing between these two contradictory requirements is
a key challenge in our algorithm.
AnO(r3) update time algorithm. We manage to cope with these and other hurdles by
instead switching to a “hyperedge-centric” view of the algorithm. Informally speaking, this
means that instead of letting vertices derive the potential values and levels, we assign these
values to the hyperedges and use those to define the corresponding level for remaining vertices.
Under this new view of the algorithm, we can indeed generalize the approach of [25] to obtain
an O(r4)-update time algorithm for rankr hypergraphs. Considering the intricacies in [25],
already achieving thisO(r4) time bound turned out to be considerably challenging.
ESA 2021
=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
8:6 Fully Dynamic Set Cover via Hypergraph Maximal Matching
Improving the update time toO(r3) is based on the following insight. In this hyperedge-
centric view, a level-ℓ matched hyperedgee is sampled to the matching from a sample space
S(e) of size roughlyαℓ, whereα = Θ(r). We refer to the hyperedges inS(e) as thecore
hyperedgesof e. All the core hyperedges ofe are then also assigned a levelℓ. Let us focus on
an e′ = (u1,...,u r)∈S(e). Subsequently,u1 may initiate the creation of a new matched
hyperedge at levelℓ′ > ℓ, at which stage we randomly sample a new matched hyperedge,
denoted bye1, among all its incident hyperedges of level lower thanℓ′, soe′∈S(e1), i.e.,
hyperedgee′ is now a core hyperedge ofe1 as well. Perhaps lateru2 may initiate the creation
of a new matched hyperedgee2 at levelℓ′′ >ℓ′, and then hyperedgee′ will become a core
hyperedge ofe2, and so on and so forth. Thus any hyperedge may serve as a core hyperedge
of up tor matched hyperedges at any point in time.
To shave a factor ofr from the runtime, we need to make sure that each hyperedge
serves as a core hyperedge of asingle matched hyperedge. This is achieved by “freezing” (or
temporarily deleting) all core hyperedges of a newly created matched hyperedgee; in the
sequel (see Section 3.2) we shall refer to these hyperedges astemporarily deleted hyperedges
(due toe) rather than “core hyperedges”, and they will comprise the setD(e). Then, whenever
the matched hyperedge gets deleted from the matching, we need to “unfreeze” these core
hyperedges and update all theirignored data structures – our analysis shows that this can
be carried out efficiently.
Since this algorithm already requires an entirely new view of the previous approaches for
ordinary graphs and several nontrivial ideas, we present it as a standalone result in Section 3.
An O(r2) update time algorithm. The main step is to improve the update time from
O(r3) to O(r2). We next provide a couple of technical highlights behind this improvement.
In our algorithm, the potential values of level-ℓ matched hyperedges are in the range
[αℓ,αℓ+1), forα =O(r), hence they may differ by a factor ofO(r). Consider the moment a
level-ℓ matched hyperedgee = (u1,...,u r) gets deleted by the adversary; the leveling scheme
allows us to assume we have anO(αℓ+2) “potential time” for handling this hyperedge. To
get an update time ofO(r2), we need to handle each of the endpointsui∈e within time
O(αℓ+1) time or instead “contribute” to the potential by creating a new matched hyperedge.
If ui has more thanαℓ+1 incident hyperedges of level at mostℓ, we can sample a random
hyperedge among them to be added to the matching, thereby creating a level-(ℓ + 1)matched
hyperedge; we discuss some issues related to the creation of matched edges later. But ifui
has slightly less thanαℓ+1 incident edges, this sample space size suffices only for creating a
level-ℓ matched edge, but it is crucial that the sample space of a level-ℓ matched edge would
consist only of edges where all endpoints have level strictly lower thanℓ. Even checking
whether this is the case is too costly, since iterating over all endpoints of all such edges takes
time (slightly less than)O(αℓ+2), and if we are in the same scenario for eachui this gives
rise to a runtime ofO(αℓ+3), and thus to an amortized update time ofO(r3). Even if we
could check this for free, if most of the edges have endpoints of levelℓ, we need to find those
endpoints, and to pass the “ownership” of the edges to those endpoints. To cope with these
issues, we maintain a data structure for each hyperedgee that keeps track of all its endpoints
of highest level and inO(1) time returns an arbitrary such endpoint or reports that none
exists. Of course, now the challenge becomes maintaining these data structures for the edges
with O(r2) update time.
Consider the moment that a level-ℓ matched edgee is created. At this stage, another
crucial invariant tells us to “raise” all endpoints of edgee to levelℓ, and then to update the
ownership set of each endpoint according to its up-to-date level. One challenging case is when
=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
S. Assadi and S. Solomon 8:7
each endpointui of e now owns slightly less thanαℓ+1 new edges. This sample space size
does not suffice for creating a level-(ℓ + 1) matched edge yet it is too costly to update each
of the endpoints of these edges about the up-to-date level ofui; summing over all endpoints
of e, this again gives rise to update time ofO(r3). However, if we are equipped with the
aforementioned data structure, we can efficiently focus on the edges where all endpoints have
level lower thanℓ, and can thus create a level-ℓ matched edge. This is not enough, however,
since we are merely replacing one level-ℓ matched edge by another, and this process could
repeat over and over. Our goal would be to replace one level-ℓ matched edge byat least two
others, so as to provide enough increase in “potential” to cover for this runtime. Since the
total number of edges incident one in this case is slightly less thanαℓ+2, the intuition is
that we should be able to easily achieve here a fan-out of 2, and therefore a valid charging
argument. Alas, there is one significant caveat when working with hypergraphs, which we
already mentioned above – dependencies. It is possible that the first level-ℓ matched edge that
we randomly sampled foru1 intersects all the edges incident one, which will result in fan-out
1. To overcome this final obstacle, we take our hyperedge-centric view to the next level by
employing a new sampling method different than [5, 25] altogether. In particular, in this
case, our sample space is not necessarily restricted to hyperedges incident on a single vertex,
but could be an arbitrary hyperedge set as a function of the deleted hyperedge; however,
importantly, to achieve alocalsampling method, we will make sure that the entire sample
space is incident to the endpoints of a single edge. This new sampling method (see Procedure
insert-hyperedge in Section 5 of the full version [4]) entails a few technical complications
primarily to ensure that we still get enough “potential” from the adversary, but it ultimately
enables us to achieve the desired update time bound ofO(r2).
The role of randomness in our algorithm.Our algorithm relies crucially on randomization
and on the oblivious adversary assumption, and the probabilistic analysis employed in this
work is highly nontrivial; in particular, the usage of randomization for reducing the update
time bound fromO(r3) to O(r2) relies on several new insights. We note that if the entire
update sequence is known in advance and is stored in a data structure that allows for fast
access, which is sometimes referred to as the “(dynamic) offline setting” (cf. [16]) – then
a straightforward variant of our algorithm worksdeterministically with O(r2) amortized
update time. Specifically, whenever a matched edge is randomly sampled by our algorithm
(which is always done uniformly) from a carefully chosen sample space of edges – in the
offline setting, instead of randomly sampling the matched edge, one can choose the matched
edge deterministically to be the one that will be deleted last among all edges in the sample
space. It is not difficult to verify that this simple tweak translates our probabilisticO(r2)
amortized update time bound into a deterministicO(r2) time bound, while avoiding the
entire probabilistic analysis. The probabilistic ingredients of the analysis are omitted due to
space constraints; they appear in Sections 7 and 8 of the full version [4].
2 Preliminaries and Organization
Hypergraph Notation. For a hypergraphG = (V,E ), V denotes the set of vertices andE
denotes the set of hyperedges. We usev∈e to mean thatv is one of the vertices incident
on hyperedgee. Rank r of a hypergraph is the maximum number of vertices incident on
any edge, i.e.,r := max{|e|| e∈E}. A matchingM in G is a collection of vertex-disjoint
hyperedges ofM. A matchingM is calledmaximal if no other edge ofG can be added toM
without violating its matching constraint. A vertex coverU in G is a collection of vertices so
that every hyperedge inE has at least one endpoint inU. We use the next standard fact.
ESA 2021
=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
8:8 Fully Dynamic Set Cover via Hypergraph Maximal Matching
▶ Fact 1. LetG be any hypergraph with rankr. SupposeM is a maximal matching inG
and U denotes all vertices incident onM. ThenU is anr-approximate vertex cover ofG.
Hypergraph Formulation of Set Cover. Consider a familyS ={S1,...,S m} of sets over a
universe [n]. We can representS by a hypergraphG onm vertices corresponding to sets ofS
and n hyperedges corresponding to elements of[n]: Any elementi∈ [n] is now a hyperedge
between vertices corresponding to sets inS that containi. It is easy to see that there is a
one-to-one correspondence between set covers ofS and vertex covers ofG and that the rank
r of G is the same as the maximum frequency parameterf in the set cover instance. With
this transformation, by Fact 1, obtaining anf-approximation to this instance of set cover
reduces to obtaining a maximal matching ofG. This is the direction we take in this paper
for designing fully dynamic algorithms for set cover by designing a fully dynamic algorithm
for hypergraph maximal matching.
Organization. Due to space constraints, in this extended abstract we focus on theO(r3)
update time algorithm and its analysis, where we provide only part of the analysis. The
O(r2) update time algorithm and its analysis are inherently more involved and are entirely
omitted. All the missing details appear in the full version [4].
3 An O(r3)-Update Time Algorithm
Throughout, we useM to denote the maximal matching of the underlying hypergraph
G = (V,E ) maintained by the algorithm. We use the following parameters in our algorithm:
α := (4·r), L :=⌈logα|N|⌉ (1)
whereN approximates the dynamic number of edges|E| plus the fixed number of vertices|V|
from above, so thatlogα|N| = Θ(logα(|V| +|E|)). Every Ω(N) steps we update the value of
N, and as a result rebuild all the data structures; this adds a runtime ofO(|V|+|E|) =O(N)
every Ω(N) update steps, hence a negligible overhead to the amortized cost of the algorithm.
We may henceforth ignore this technical subtlety and treatN as a fixed value in what follows.
3.1 A Leveling Scheme and Hyperedge Ownerships
We use a leveling scheme for the input hypergraph that partitions hyperedges and vertices.
This is done by assigning alevel ℓ(e) to each hyperedgee∈E and alevel ℓ(v) to each vertex
v∈V.
▶ Invariant 2. Our leveling scheme satisfies the following properties:
1. For any hyperedgee∈ E, 0≤ ℓ(e)≤ L and for any vertexv∈ V,−1≤ ℓ(v)≤ L;
moreover,ℓ(v) =−1 iff v is unmatched by M.
2. For any matched hyperedgee∈M and any incident vertexv∈e, ℓ(v) =ℓ(e).
3. For any unmatched hyperedgee /∈M, ℓ(e) = maxv∈eℓ(v).
Our leveling scheme needs only to specifyℓ(e) for eache∈ M; the rest are fixed determ-
inistically by Invariant 2. Moreover, this invariant ensures that the matchingM obtained
by the algorithm is maximal as all unmatched vertices are at level−1 while the level of
any hyperedge is at least0 and at the same time equal to the maximum level of any of its
incident vertices. Based on the leveling scheme, we assign each hyperedgee to exactly one of
its incident verticesv∈e with ℓ(v) =ℓ(e) to own (the ties between multiple vertices at the
same level are broken by the algorithm). We useO(v) to denote the set of edges owned byv.
This definition, combined with Invariant 2, implies the following invariant.
=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
S. Assadi and S. Solomon 8:9
▶ Invariant 3. (i) For any vertexv∈ V, any owned hyperedgee∈O (v), and any other
incident vertexu∈e, ℓ(u)≤ℓ(v). (ii) For any vertexv∈V, any incident hyperedgee∈v
has ℓ(e)≥ℓ(v).
3.2 Temporarily Deleted Hyperedges
To obtain the desired update time ofO(r3), we would need to allow some hyperedges of the
hypergraph to be consideredtemporarily deletedand no longer participate in any of the other
data structures; moreover, whenever we no longer consider them deleted, we simply treat
them as a hyperedge insertion to our hypergraph and handle them similarly (which will take
O(r) time per each hyperedge exactly as in the previous algorithm). The role of these deleted
hyperedges becomes apparent only in the probabilistic analysis that is omitted due to space
constraints; see Section 7 in the full version [4] for this analysis. However, it is the goal of
the algorithm itself (rather than the analysis) to cope efficiently with the required deletions.
We shall note that these deletions constitute one of several differences of our algorithm with
that of [25]. The next invariant allows us to maintain the maximality of our matching.
▶ Invariant 4. Any temporarily deletedhyperedge is incident on somematched hyperedge.
To maintain Invariant 4, each matched hyperedgee∈M is responsiblefor a set of deleted
edges denoted byD(e) and stored in a linked-list data structure. This set will befinalized at
the timee joins the matchingM and will remain unchanged throughout the algorithm untile
is removed fromM; at that point, we simply bring back all hyperedges inD(e) to the graph
as new hyperedge insertions. Invariant 4 is crucial for the correctness of our algorithm.
We note that besides this data structureD(e), these deleted hyperedgesdo not appear
in any other data structure of the algorithm and do not (necessarily) satisfy any of the
invariants in the algorithm – they are simply treated as if they do not belong to the hypergraph.
Invariant 4 ensures that even though we are ignoring temporarily deleted hyperedges in the
algorithm, the resulting maximal matching on the hypergraph of undeleted hyperedges is
still a maximal matching for the entire hypergraph. As such, throughout the rest of the
paper, with a slight abuse of notation, whenever we talk about hyperedges ofG, we refer to
the hyperedges that are not temporarily deleted (unless explicitly stated otherwise).
3.3 Data Structures
We maintain the following information for each vertexv∈V (again, to emphasize, we ignore
the temporarily deleted hyperedges in all the following data structures):
ℓ(v): the level ofv in the leveling scheme;
M(v): the hyperedge inM incident onv (if v is unmatchedM(v) =⊥);
O(v): the set of hyperedgese owned byv – we defineov :=|O(v)|;
N (v): the set of hyperedgese incident onv;
A(v,ℓ ) for any integerℓ≥ℓ(v): the set of hyperedgese∈N (v) that arenot owned byv
and have levelℓ(e) =ℓ – we defineav,ℓ :=|A(v,ℓ )|.
We also maintain the following information for each hyperedgee∈E:
ℓ(e): the level ofe in the leveling scheme;
O(e): the single vertexv∈e that ownse, i.e.,e∈O (v);
M(e): a Boolean variable to indicate whether or note is matched.
We also maintain back-and-forth pointers between these different data structures that refer
to the same hyperedge or vertex in a straightforward way.
ESA 2021
=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
8:10 Fully Dynamic Set Cover via Hypergraph Maximal Matching
Next, we introduce the main procedures used for updating these data structures. In these
procedures, if there is room for confusion, we use superscript∗old to denote a parameter or
data structure∗ before the update and∗new to denote the value of∗ after the update.
Procedure set-owner(e,v ). Given a hyperedgee and vertex v∈ e where ℓ(v) =
maxu∈eℓ(u), sets owner ofe to bev, i.e.,O(e) =v.
To implementset-owner(e,v ), we first setOnew(e) =v and ℓnew(e) =ℓ(v), adde toO(v),
and removee fromO(Oold(e)). Ifℓnew(e) =ℓold(e), there is nothing else to do. Otherwise,
for anyw̸=v∈e, we removee fromA(w,ℓ old(e)) and instead inserte inA(w,ℓ new(e)).
▷ Claim 5 (straightforward proof). set-owner(e,v ) takesO(r) time.
Procedure set-level(v,ℓ ). Given a vertexv∈ V and integerℓ∈{− 1, 0,...,L },
updates the level ofv to ℓ, i.e., setsℓ(v) =ℓ.
The implementation ofset-level(v,ℓ ) is as follows. First, we determine the ownership of
all hyperedgese∈O old(v) that were previously owned byv. We go over each hyperedge
e ∈ Oold(v) one by one, find u := arg maxw∈eℓ(w) (where we use ℓnew(v) = ℓ for the
computations here), and use the procedureset-owner(e,u ) to update the owner ofe to u.
If ℓold(v)>ℓ , nothing is left to do as no new hyperedge needs to be owned byv now that
level ofv has decreased (Invariant 3). Ifℓold(v)<ℓ , we should makev the new owner of all
hyperedges e∈N (v) with level betweenℓold(v) to ℓ− 1. This is done by traversing the lists
maintained inA(v,ℓ old(v)),··· ,A(v,ℓ− 1), and runningset-owner(e,v ) for each edgee in
these lists.
Remark. It will be the responsibility of the procedure callingset-level to make sure that
the invariants (and particularly Invariant 2) continue to hold.
▷ Claim 6. set-level(v,ℓ ) takesO
(
r· (oold
v +onew
v ) +ℓ + 1
)
time.
Proof. The algorithm iterates over all hyperedges inOold(v) and use set-owner that takes
O(r) time by Claim 5 for each one. Whenℓold(v)>ℓ , this is all that is done by the algorithm
and the bound on runtime follows. Otherwise, the algorithm also needs to iterate over the
listsA(v,ℓ old(v)),··· ,A(v,ℓ− 1) one by one which takesO(ℓ) time and runset-owner for
each of them that takesO(r·onew
v ) time in total. This gives the bound on runtime. ◁
3.4 The Update Algorithm
There are multiple cases to handle by the update algorithm depending on whether the
updated hyperedge is an insertion or deletion, and whether or not it belongs to the maximal
matchingM. But the only interesting case is when a hyperedge inM is deleted and that is
where we start with.
3.4.1 Case 1: a hyperedge e∈M is deleted
There are two things we should take care of upon deletion of a hyperedgee from M;
bringing back the temporarily deleted hyperedges inD(e) to maintain Invariant 4, and more
importantly, updating the matchingM to ensure its maximality. All the interesting part of
the algorithm happen in the second step, but before we get to that, let us quickly mention
how the first part is done.
=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
S. Assadi and S. Solomon 8:11
Maintaining Invariant 4
Throughout the course of handling a single hyperedge update, we may need to delete multiple
hyperedgese1,e 2,... fromM, starting from the originally deleted hyperedge by the adversary.
Each of these hyperedgeei∈M that are now removed fromM is responsible for temporarily
deleted hyperedgesD(ei).
We will maintain a queue of all hyperedges inD(e1),D(e2),... during the course of this
update. At thevery endof the update, once all other changes are finalized, we will insert
the hyperedges in this queue one by one to the hypergraph as if they were inserted by the
adversary (using the procedure of Section 3.4.3). This allows us to maintain Invariant 4.
We note that throughout the update we may also temporarily delete some new hyperedges.
We’ll show that in that case, all these hyperedges are also incident on some matched hyperedge
which is responsible for them and thus Invariant 4 holds for these hyperedges as well.
Maintaining maximality ofM
Let us now begin the main part of the update algorithm. Supposee = (v1,...,v r) is deleted
from M. This makes the verticesv1,...,v r temporarily free. We will handle each of these
vertices using the procedurehandle-free which is the key ingredient of the update algorithm
(we will simply runhandle-free(v1),..., handle-free(vr)).
Procedure handle-free(v). Handles a given vertexv∈V which isunmatched currently
in the algorithm (its matched hyperedge may have been deleted via an update or by
the algorithm in this time step, orv may simply be unmatched at this point of the
algorithm)a.
a To simplify the exposition, we may some time callhandle-free(v) for a vertexv that is now
matched again (while handling other vertices). In that case, this procedure simply aborts.
The execution of Procedurehandle-free(v) depends on the number of owned hyperedges ofv,
i.e.,ov (both procedures used within this one are described below):(i) ifov <α ℓ(v)+1, we will
run deterministic-settle(v); and otherwise(ii) ifov≥αℓ(v)+1, we runrandom-settle(v)
instead. We now describe each procedure.
Procedure deterministic-settle(v). Handles a given vertexv ∈ V with ov <
αℓ(v)+1.
In deterministic-settle(v), we iterate over all hyperedgese∈O (v) owned byv and check
whether all endpoints ofe are now unmatched; if so, we adde toM, and runset-level(v, 0)
and set-owner(e,v ). Moreover, for any vertexu̸=v∈e, we further runset-level(u, 0)
so all vertices incident one are now at level 0. If no such hyperedge is found, we run
set-level(v,−1).
▷ Claim 7. deterministic-settle(v) takesO(r·oold
v ) =O(r·αℓold(v)+1) time and main-
tains Invariants 2 and 3 for vertexv and hyperedges incident onv.
Proof. Checking if there is any hyperedge that can be added toM takes O(r·oold
v ) time.
Moreover, running set-level(v, 0) or set-level(v,−1) takeO(r·oold
v ) time by Claim 6 as
onew
v ≤oold
v considering level ofv has not increased. If the algorithm finds a hyperedgee to
add toM, we runset-level(u, 0) for u̸=v∈e as well which takesO(1) time for eachu
by Claim 6 asℓold(u) =−1 (u was unmatched and by Invariant 2) and thusoold
u =onew
u = 0.
As there are at mostr− 1 choices foru, this step takesO(r) =O(r·αℓold(v)+1) time (we are
not being tight here). We also need to runset-owner(e,v ) in this case which takes another
O(r) time by Claim 5. Sincedeterministic-settle(v) is only called whenoold
v <α ℓold(v)+1,
the desired time bound follows.
ESA 2021
=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
8:12 Fully Dynamic Set Cover via Hypergraph Maximal Matching
As for maintaining Invariant 2, consider the hyperedgee chosen by the algorithm to be
added toM. We set the level of all vertices incident one to be 0 and makingv the owner
of e, hence satisfying Invariant 2. On the other hand, if we cannot find such a hyperedge
e incident onv, we know that all hyperedges incident onv are already at level at least0
by Invariant 2 (even after removingv) and hence settingℓnew(v) =−1 keeps Invariant 2.
Invariant 3 also holds by maintaining Invariant 2 and the fact that we choose correct owners
in the algorithm. ◁
Before defining random-settle, we need the following definition. For any vertexv∈V
and integerℓ>ℓ (v), we define:
~ov,ℓ: the number of edgesv will ownassuming we increase its level fromℓ(v) to ℓ.
The following claim is a straightforward corollary of procedureset-level.
▷ Claim 8. For anyv∈V and ℓ>ℓ (v),~ov,ℓ =
(∑ℓ−1
ℓ′=ℓ(v)av,ℓ′
)
+ov. In particular,~ov,ℓ can
be obtained from~ov,ℓ−1 in O(1) time.
We can now describerandom-settle (this is the main procedure of our update algorithm).
Procedure random-settle(v). Handles a given vertexv∈V with ov≥αℓ(v)+1.
In random-settle(v), we first compute the levelℓnew(v) as minimum ℓ>ℓ (v) with~ov,ℓ <
αℓ+1 and run set-level(v,ℓ new(v)). Then, we sample a hyperedgee uniformly at random
fromOnew(v). The next step of the algorithm now depends on this particular hyperedgee.
Case (a): for all u∈e, ~ou,ℓnew(v) <α ℓnew(v)+1. In this case, we add the hyperedge
e to M and run set-level(u,ℓ new(v)) for all u ∈ e to maintain Invariant 2. This
potentially can makeM not a matching since some matched hyperedgese1,...,e k for
k<r incident one might be inM. We will thus delete these hyperedges fromM one by
one andrecursively run the procedure of Section 3.4.1 for each one, treating itas if this
hyperedge was deleted by the adversary (although we donot remove the hyperedge from
the hypergraph).
Case (b): there exists u ∈ e, s.t. ~ou,ℓnew(v) ≥ αℓnew(v)+1. We run
deterministic-settle(v) to handlev and “switch” the focus tou instead. We then call
set-level(u,ℓ new(v)). Ifu is matched inM, say by hyperedgeeu, we removeeu from
M, and thenrecursively run the procedure of Section 3.4.1 for hyperedgeeu – we only
note that when processingeu, we start by runninghandle-free(u) first before all other
vertices incident oneu; this is only done for making the analysis more clear and is not
needed. Ifu is not matched inM, we will simply runhandle-free(u).
▷ Claim 9. The first step of random-settle(v) before either case (changing level ofv
and picking hyperedgee) takesO(r·αℓnew(v)+1) time. Additionally, case (a) takes O(r2·
αℓnew(v)+1) time and case (b) takes O(r·onew
u ) time ignoring the recursive calls. Finally,
random-settle(v) maintains Invariants 2 and 3.
Proof. Finding ℓnew(v) takes O(ℓnew(v)) time by Claim 8 andset-level(v,ℓ new(v)) takes
O(r·onew
v +ℓnew(v)) =O(r·αℓnew(v)+1) time by Claim 6 as level ofv is increased (and so is
number of its owned edges) and sinceonew
v <α ℓnew(v)+1 by design. This proves the first part.
The second part for case(a) also follows because for anyu∈ e, set-level(u,ℓ new(v))
takesO(r·onew
u +ℓnew(u)) =O(r·~ou,ℓnew(v) +ℓnew(v)) by Claim 6 as level ofu is increased.
This isO(r·αℓnew(v)+1) by the condition~ou,ℓnew(v) <α ℓnew(v)+1 in case (a). Multiplying this
with at mostr verticesu∈e gives the desired bound.
=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
S. Assadi and S. Solomon 8:13
The second part for case(b) holds because v has ov≤ αℓnew(v)+1 by the definition of
ℓnew(v) and thusdeterministic-settle(v) takesO(r·αℓnew(v)+1) time by Claim 7. Moreover,
running set-level(u,ℓ new(v)) takesO(r·onew
u ) by Claim 6 which is at leastO(r·αℓnew(v)+1)
by the lower bound on~ou,ℓnew(v) in this case.
Finally, Invariants 2 and 3 also hold as explained in the description of the procedure.◁
The following observation plays a key rule in the recursive analysis of our algorithm.
▶Observation 10.In random-settle(v): (i) the hyperedgee is sampled uniformly at random
from at leastαℓnew(v) edges. Moreover, (ii) any hyperedgee1,...,e k or eu deleted fromM
during this procedure is at level at mostℓnew(v)− 1.
Part (i) of the observation follows from the definition ofℓnew(v). For part (ii), note that
any deleted edgee′ in the process is incident one with ℓold(e) = ℓold(v) < ℓnew(v). Let
u be any vertex incident on bothe′ and e. Firstly, ℓ(u)≤ ℓold(v) as e was owned byv
and notu, and secondlyℓ(e′) = ℓ(u) as e′ is a matched hyperedge (see Invariant 2); thus
ℓ(e′)≤ℓ(e)<ℓ new(v) as well.
Temporarily deleting new hyperedges
An astute reader may have noticed that we have not yet temporarily deleted any hyperedge in
the update algorithm. The only place that this will be done is in case(a) of random-settle.
In this case, when we decide to inserte toM, we will temporarily delete all other hyperedges
inOnew(v) from whiche was sampled from, and makee responsible for them by adding them
toD(e). The deletions of these hyperedges is done by the procedure of Section 3.4.2 (as they
do not belong toM). As the cost of each such hyperedge deletion isO(r) and their total
number isO(αℓnew(v)+1), this does not change the asymptotic bounds of Claim 9. Finally,
since these edges are incident one which now belongs toM, Invariant 4 will be maintained
by this process. The following observation is now immediate.
▶ Observation 11. Any hyperedgee∈M is responsible forO(αℓ(e)+1) hyperedges inD(e).
3.4.2 Case 2: a hyperedge e /∈M is deleted
We only need to removee from the corresponding data structures which can be done inO(r)
time for the (at most)r endpoints ofe.
3.4.3 Case 3: a hyperedge e is inserted
We need to find v = arg maxu∈eℓ(u) and run set-owner(e,v ) which takes O(r) time.
Moreover, if all vertices incident one are unmatched, we should additionally adde to M
and run set-level(u, 0) for allu∈e which takesO(r) time per vertex by Claim 6.
This concludes the description of our algorithm for update timeO(r3).
4 Part of the Analysis of theO(r3)-Update Time Algorithm
A key definition in analysis is the notion of anepoch borrowed from the prior work in [5, 25].
▶ Definition 12 (Epoch). For any timet and any hyperedgee in the matchingM at timet,
epochof e and t, denoted byepoch(e,t ), is the pair(e,{t′}) where{t′} denotes the maximal
continuous time period containingt during whiche was always present inM (not even deleted
temporarily during one step and inserted back at the same time step).
ESA 2021
=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
8:14 Fully Dynamic Set Cover via Hypergraph Maximal Matching
We further definelevel of epoch(e,t ) as the levelℓ(e) of e during the time period of the epoch;
we note that our update algorithm never changes level of a hyperedge inM without removing
it fromM first and thus level of an epoch is well-defined.
The update algorithm in Section 3.4 takesO(r) time deterministically for any update step
that doesnot change the matchingM. However, an update at a time stept that changesM
may force the algorithm a large computation time and hence we use amortization to charge
the cost of processing such an update at timet to the epochs that are created and removed
at timet. In particular, for any time stept, define:
epochscreate(t): the set of all epoch(e,t ) that are created at time t; respectively,
epochsterm(t) is defined for epochsterminated at timet;
Ccreate(epoch(e,t )): the computation cost at timet for creationof epoch(e,t ); respectively,
Cterm(epoch(e,t )) is defined for the cost oftermination of epoch(e,t ).
Then, the total cost of update at timet is:
C(t) =O(r) +
∑
epoch(e,t)∈
epochscreate(t)
Ccreate(epoch(e,t )) +
∑
epoch(e,t)∈
epochsterm(t)
Cterm(epoch(e,t )). (2)
▶ Lemma 13. The total computation costC(t) of an update at timet in Equation (2) can
be charged to the epochs in the RHS so that any level-ℓ epoch is charged withO(αℓ+3) units
of cost.
Proof. We prove this lemma in a sequence of claims. In the following, whenever we say “some
computation cost can be charged toCcreate(epoch(e,t )) orCterm(epoch(e,t ))” we mean that
the cost of computation isO(αℓ+3) and there is a level-ℓ epoch epoch(e,t ) at timet that is
either created or terminated, respectively, and that this cost is charged toCcreate(epoch(e,t ))
or Cterm(epoch(e,t )). We emphasize that each epoch during this process is only charged a
constant number of times. This then immediately satisfies the bounds in Lemma 13.
▷ Claim 14. Cost of a hyperedge-insertion update e at time t can be charged to
Ccreate(epoch(e,t )).
Proof. As in Section 3.4.3, this update takesO(r) time and creates a level-0 epoch(e,t ). ◁
From now on, we consider the main case of a hyperedge-deletion updatee from M
at timet using the procedure in Section 3.4.1. In this case, we removee from M which
results in epoch(e,t ) to be terminated (and henceepoch(e,t )∈ epochsterm(t) in RHS of
C(t) in Equation (2)). This step is then followed by runninghandle-free(v) for allv∈
e. Recall that handle-free(v) can be handled either by deterministic-settle(v) or
random-settle(v) (depending on value ofov).
▷ Claim 15. Let e be a hyperedge inM deleted at timet (either by the adversary or the
algorithm in a recursive call). Cost ofhandle-free(v) for allv∈ e that are handled by
deterministic-settle(v) can be charged toCterm(epoch(e,t )).
Proof. By Claim 7, for eachv∈e that is handled bydeterministic-settle(v), the runtime
of handle-free(v) is O(r·αℓ(e)+1). As there are at mostr such vertices, their total cost is
O(r2·αℓ(e)+1) =O(αℓ(e)+3) by the choice ofα in Equation (1). Hence the total cost of all
these vertices that are charged toCterm(epoch(e,t )) is O(αℓ(e)+3). ◁
We now switch to analyzingrandom-settle(v) for a fixedv∈e. The easier part, when
we can processrandom-settle(v) by case (a), is handled via the next claim.
=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
S. Assadi and S. Solomon 8:15
▷ Claim 16. Cost of case(a) of random-settle(v) at timet ignoring the recursive callscan
be charged toCcreate(epoch(ev,t )), whereev is the hyperedge inserted toM in this case.
Proof. In case(a) of random-settle(v), we create a new edgeev inM at levelℓ(ev) =ℓnew(v).
By Claim 9, ignoring the recursive calls, this case takesO(r2·αℓ(ev)+1) =O(αℓ(ev)+3) time.
We can thus charge the cost ofrandom-settle(v) to Ccreate(epoch(ev,t )). ◁
We now analyze case(b) of random-settle(v). In this case, instead of handlingv, we in
fact recursively handle the vertexu (with~ou,ℓnew(v)≥αℓnew(v)+1) using handle-free(u) and
only after that will come back to take care ofv if needed. Moreover, since we first set level
of u to ℓnew(v), we will haveonew
u ≥αℓnew(u)+1. This means handle-free(u) will be handled
using random-settle(u) recursively. It is again possible thatrandom-settle(u) hits case
(b) and so on and so forth. However, note that when going fromv to u, we obtain that
ℓnew(v)<ℓ new(u) by Observation 10 (hereℓnew(u) refers toℓ(u) =ℓnew(v) at the beginning
of random-settle(u)) and hence whenever case(b) happens, the vertex we move on to will
have a strictly larger level. As such, this chain of recursive calls torandom-settle will
terminate eventually in some case(a) of random-settle.
We’ll denote the vertices in the chain of calls torandom-settle in case (b) for v by
(v =)w0,w 1,w 2,...,w k for somek≤L (number of levels); in particular,w1 is the vertexu
in case (b) of random-settle(v), w2 is the vertexu in case (b) of random-settle(w1), etc.
The computation cost of random-settle(v) in case (b) then involves two parts: (i)
pre-processing before calling eachrandom-settle(wi) (which is bounded in Claim 9),(ii)
calling random-settle(wi) itself, and (iii) removing hyperedgesewi from M (for each one
that exist) and recursively handling them using the procedure of Section 3.4.1.
Among these costs, the cost of handlingewi for i∈ [k] is handled separately by recursion
(charged either to the termination ofepoch(ewi,t ) or creation of new epochs). We thus need
to handle the costs in parts(i) and (ii) in the following claim, whose proof is omitted.
▷ Claim 17. Cost of case (b) of random-settle(v) at time t with chain of ver-
tices w0,w 1,...,w k ignoring the recursive calls(i.e., part (iii) of costs above) can be
charged toCcreate(epoch(e∗,t )), where e∗ is the hyperedge inserted toM in case (a) of
random-settle(wk). (Note that by definition,random-settle(wk) finishes in case(a).)
Finally, we also have to handle the cost associated with maintaining Invariant 4, namely,
“bringing back” temporarily deleted hyperedges at the very end of the update step (the cost
of temporarily deleting new hyperedges is accounted for in Claim 9 already).
▷ Claim 18. Cost of inserting back the temporarily deleted hyperedges inD(e) for any
hyperedge e∈M can be charged toCterm(epoch(e,t )).
Proof. Any hyperedgee∈M is responsible forO(αℓ(e)+1) hyperedges inD(e) by Observa-
tion 11. As bringing back these hyperedges requiresO(r·αℓ(e)+1) time in total, this charge
can be charged to the termination ofepoch(e,t ). ◁
We thus showed that any cost inC(t) can be charged by a factor ofO(αℓ+3) to some
level-ℓ epoch in RHS of Equation (2) without charging any epoch more than a constant
number of times, thus finalizing the proof of Lemma 13. ◀
In Lemma 13, we charge at mostO(αℓ+3) to the creation and/or termination of a level-ℓ
epoch. It can be shown that, without loss of generality, we may assume that every epoch
created will also be terminated, hence we can re-distribute the charges to creation of each
level-ℓ epoch to the termination of the same epoch. We now have an equivalent charging
ESA 2021
=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
8:16 Fully Dynamic Set Cover via Hypergraph Maximal Matching
scheme in whichonly terminationof each level-ℓ epoch is charged withO(αℓ+3) computation
time (and not the creations). Recall that an epoch is terminated when the corresponding
hyperedge e is deleted from the maximal matchingM. There are two types of hyperedge
deletions fromM in the algorithm: those that are the result of the adversary deleting a
hyperedge from the graph, and those that are the result of the update algorithm to remove
a matched hyperedge in favor of another (so the original hyperedge is still part of the
hypergraph). Based on this, we differentiate between epochs as follows:
Natural epoch: Ending with the adversary deleting the hyperedgee from G.
Induced epoch: Ending with the update algorithm removing the hyperedgee from M.
With the following lemma, we are going to re-distribute the charge assigned to all induced
epochs between the natural epochs. This then will allow us to focus solely on natural epochs.
▶ Lemma 19 (proof omitted). The total cost charged to all induced epochs can be charged
to natural epochs so that any level-ℓ natural epoch is charged with the costs of at mostr− 1
induced epochs atlower levels.
Next, we move from natural and induced epochs to the corresponding notions inlevels:
A levelℓ is called aninduced level (resp., natural level) if the number of induced level-ℓ
epochs is greater than (resp., at most) the number of natural level-ℓ epochs. We will charge
the computation costs incurred by any induced level to the computation costs at higher
levels, so that in the end, the entire cost of the algorithm will be charged to natural levels.
Specifically, in any induced levelℓ, we define a one-to-one mapping from the natural to the
induced epochs. For each induced epoch, at most one natural epoch (at the same level) is
mapped to it; any natural epoch that is mapped to an induced epoch is calledsemi-natural.
For any induced levelℓ, all naturalℓ-level epochs are semi-natural by definition. For any
natural level, all natural epochs terminated at that level remain as before; these epochs are
called fully-natural. By Lemma 19, for any epoch, at mostr− 1 induced epochs at lower
levels are charged to it. We define therecursive cost of an epoch as the sum of its actual
cost and the recursive costs of the at mostr− 1 induced epochs charged to it as well as the
(at most)r− 1 semi-natural epochs mapped to them; the recursive cost of a level-0 epoch is
defined as its actual cost. We are now ready to state the following lemma (proof omitted).
▶ Lemma 20. For anyℓ≥ 0, the recursive cost of any level-ℓ epoch is bounded byO(αℓ+3).
The sum of recursive costs over all fully-natural epochs is equal to the sum of actual
costs over all epochs (fully-natural, semi-natural and induced) that have beenterminated
throughout the update sequence, which also bounds the total runtime of the algorithm.
For the omitted proofs in the above statements, we refer the reader to Section 4 in the
full version [4]. The final step of the analysis is to use the randomization in the algorithm
(and obliviousness of the adversary) to prove a probabilistic upper bound on the amortized
cost of the algorithm; this part is handled in detail in Section 7 of the full version [4].
This allows us to conclude the following theorem.
▶ Theorem 21. For any integerr> 1, starting from an empty rank-r hypergraph on a fixed
set of vertices, a maximal matching can be maintained over any sequence oft hyperedge
insertions and deletions inO(t·r3) time in expectation and with high probability.
References
1 Amir Abboud, Raghavendra Addanki, Fabrizio Grandoni, Debmalya Panigrahi, and Barna
Saha. Dynamic set cover: improved algorithms and lower bounds. InProceedings of the 51st
Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 114–125, 2019.
=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
S. Assadi and S. Solomon 8:17
2 Shiri Antaki, Quanquan C. Liu, and Shay Solomon. Dynamic distributed MIS with improved
bounds. CoRR, abs/2010.16177, 2020. arXiv:2010.16177.
3 Sepehr Assadi, Krzysztof Onak, Baruch Schieber, and Shay Solomon. Fully dynamic maximal
independent set with sublinear update time. InProceedings of the 50th Annual ACM SIGACT
Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2018, Los Angeles, CA, USA, June 25-29, 2018 ,
pages 815–826, 2018.
4 Sepehr Assadi and Shay Solomon. Fully dynamic set cover via hypergraph maximal matching:
An optimal approximation through a local approach.arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.06889 , 2021.
5 S. Baswana, M. Gupta, and S. Sen. Fully dynamic maximal matching inO(logn) update
time. In Proceedings of the 52nd IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
Science, FOCS 2011, Palm Springs, CA, October 23-25, 2011 , pages 383–392, 2011 (see also
SICOMP’15 version, and subsequent erratum).
6 S. Bhattacharya, M. Henzinger, and G. F. Italiano. Deterministic fully dynamic data structures
for vertex cover and matching. InProceedings of the 26th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, January 4-6, 2015 , pages 785–804,
2015.
7 S. Bhattacharya, M. Henzinger, and D. Nanongkai. New deterministic approximation al-
gorithms for fully dynamic matching. InSTOC, 2016.
8 S. Bhattacharya, M. Henzinger, and D. Nanongkai. Fully dynamic maximum matching and
vertex cover inO(log3n) worst case update time. InProceedings of the 28th Annual ACM-
SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2017, Barcelona, Spain, January 16-19,
2017, pages 470–489, 2017.
9 Sayan Bhattacharya, Deeparnab Chakrabarty, and Monika Henzinger. Deterministic fully
dynamic approximate vertex cover and fractional matching in O(1) amortized update time. In
Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Integer Programming and Combinatorial
Optimization, IPCO 2017, Waterloo, ON, Canada, June 26-28, 2017 , pages 86–98, 2017.
10 Sayan Bhattacharya, Monika Henzinger, and Giuseppe F. Italiano. Deterministic fully dynamic
data structures for vertex cover and matching. InProceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual
ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2015, January 4-6, 2015 , pages
785–804, 2015.
11 Sayan Bhattacharya, Monika Henzinger, and Danupon Nanongkai. A new deterministic
algorithm for dynamic set cover. In2019 IEEE 60th Annual Symposium on Foundations of
Computer Science (FOCS) , pages 406–423. IEEE, 2019.
12 Sayan Bhattacharya, Monika Henzinger, Danupon Nanongkai, and Xiaowei Wu. An improved
algorithm for dynamic set cover.CoRR, abs/2002.11171, 2020.
13 Sayan Bhattacharya and Janardhan Kulkarni. Deterministically maintaining a (2 + ϵ)-
approximate minimum vertex cover ino(1/ϵ2) amortized update time. InSODA, 2019.
14 Matthias Bonne and Keren Censor-Hillel. Distributed detection of cliques in dynamic networks.
In Christel Baier, Ioannis Chatzigiannakis, Paola Flocchini, and Stefano Leonardi, editors,
Proc. 46th ICALP, volume 132 ofLIPIcs, pages 132:1–132:15, 2019.
15 Keren Censor-Hillel, Elad Haramaty, and Zohar S. Karnin. Optimal dynamic distributed MIS.
In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC
2016, Chicago, IL, USA, July 25-28, 2016 , pages 217–226, 2016.
16 Moses Charikar and Shay Solomon. Fully dynamic almost-maximal matching: Breaking
the polynomial worst-case time barrier. In Ioannis Chatzigiannakis, Christos Kaklamanis,
Dániel Marx, and Donald Sannella, editors,Proc. 45th ICALP, volume 107 ofLIPIcs, pages
33:1–33:14. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2018.
17 Irit Dinur and David Steurer. Analytical approach to parallel repetition. InProceedings of the
forty-sixth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing , pages 624–633, 2014.
18 Anupam Gupta, Ravishankar Krishnaswamy, Amit Kumar, and Debmalya Panigrahi. Online
and dynamic algorithms for set cover. InProceedings of the 49th Annual ACM SIGACT
ESA 2021
=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
8:18 Fully Dynamic Set Cover via Hypergraph Maximal Matching
Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2017, Montreal, QC, Canada, June 19-23, 2017 ,
pages 537–550, 2017.
19 Haim Kaplan and Shay Solomon. Dynamic representations of sparse distributed networks: A
locality-sensitive approach. In Christian Scheideler and Jeremy T. Fineman, editors,Proc. of
30th SPAA 2018 , pages 33–42, 2018.
20 Subhash Khot and Oded Regev. Vertex cover might be hard to approximate to within 2-epsilon.
J. Comput. Syst. Sci. , 74(3):335–349, 2008.
21 Ofer Neiman and Shay Solomon. Simple deterministic algorithms for fully dynamic maximal
matching. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of
Computing, STOC 2013, Palo Alto, CA, USA, June 1-4, 2013 , pages 745–754, 2013.
22 Merav Parter, David Peleg, and Shay Solomon. Local-on-average distributed tasks. In
Proceedings of the 27th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2016,
Arlington, V A, USA, January 10-12, 2016 , pages 220–239, 2016.
23 D. Peleg. Distributed Computing: A Locality-Sensitive Approach . SIAM, 2000.
24 D. Peleg and S. Solomon. Dynamic (1 + ϵ)-approximate matchings: A density-sensitive
approach. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms,
SODA 2016, Arlington, V A, USA, January 10-12, 2016 , 2016.
25 S. Solomon. Fully dynamic maximal matching in constant update time. InProceedings of
the 57th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2016, New
Brunswick, NJ, USA, October 9-11, 2016 , pages 325–334, 2016.
26 David P Williamson and David B Shmoys.The design of approximation algorithms . Cambridge
university press, 2011.