=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
arXiv:2208.07359v1  [cs.DC]  15 Aug 2022
Stable Scheduling in Transactional Memory
Costas Busch ∗ Bogdan S. Chlebus ∗ Dariusz R. Kowalski ∗ Pavan Poudel ∗
Abstract
We study computer systems with transactions executed on a set o f shared objects. Trans-
actions arrive continually subjects to constrains that are framed as an adversarial model and
impose limits on the average rate of transaction generation and the number of objects that
transactions use. We show that no deterministic distributed sched uler in the queue-free model
of transaction autonomy can provide stability for any positive rate of transaction generation.
Let a system consist of m shared objects and an adversary be constrained such that each trans-
action may access at most k shared objects. We prove that no scheduler can be stable if a
generation rate is greater than max
{ 2
k+1 , 2
⌊
√
2m⌋
}
. We develop a centralized scheduler that is
stable if a transaction generation rate is at most max
{ 1
4k , 1
4⌈√m⌉
}
. We design a distributed
scheduler in the queue-based model of transaction autonomy, in w hich a transaction is assigned
to an individual processor, that guarantees stability if the rate of transaction generation is less
than max
{ 1
6k , 1
6⌈√m⌉
}
. For each of the schedulers we give upper bounds on the queue size and
transaction latency in the range of rates of transaction generat ion for which the scheduler is
stable.
Key words: Transactional memory, shared object, dynamic transaction gen eration, adversarial
model, stability, latency.
∗ School of Computer and Cyber Sciences, Augusta University, Augusta, Georgia, USA.
=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
1 Introduction
We propose to investigate dynamic transactional memory wit h arrivals of transactions modeled
adversarially. The goal is to develop a framework to assess t he performance of transaction schedulers
in quantitative terms. In particular, we seek schedulers th at provide stability of transaction-memory
systems and restrain delays in processing transactions.
The adversarial models of generating transactions that we u se are inspired by the adversar-
ial queueing theory, which has been applied to study stabili ty of routing algorithms with packets
injected continually. Transmissions of packets in communi cation networks are constrained by the
properties of network, like its topology and capacities of l inks or channels. In the case of transac-
tional memory, executing multiple transactions concurren tly is constrained by the property that a
transaction requires exclusive access to each object it nee ds to interact with.
A computer system includes a ﬁxed set of shared objects. Thre ads with transactions to execute
are spawned continually. The system is synchronous in that a n execution of an algorithm schedul-
ing transactions is structured into rounds. It takes one rou nd to execute a transaction successfully.
Multiple transactions can be invoked concurrently, but a tr ansaction requires exclusive access to
each object that it needs to interact with in order to be execu ted successfully. If multiple transac-
tions accessing the same object are invoked at a round then al l of them are aborted. The arrival
of threads with transactions is governed by an adversarial m odel with parameters bounding the
average generation rate and the number of transactions that can be generated at one round. Pro-
cessed transactions may be additionally constrained by imp osing an upper bound on the number
of objects a transaction needs to access.
The task of a considered computer system is to eventually exe cute each generated transaction,
while striving to limit the number of pending transactions a t any round and the time spent waiting
by each pending transaction. Once a transaction is generate d, it may need to wait to be invoked.
It is a scheduling algorithm that manages the timings of invo cations of pending transactions. We
consider both centralized and distributed schedulers.
There are two models of generating transactions which speci fy the autonomy of individual
transactions. In the queue-free case, for each transaction there is a corresponding autonomous
thread responsible for its execution. A distributed schedu ler in the queue-free model is executed
by the threads that attempt to invoke transactions on shared objects. In the queue-based model,
there is a ﬁxed set of processors, and each thread with a trans action is assigned to a processor.
A distributed scheduler in the queue-based model is execute d by the processors that communicate
through the shared objects by performing transactions on th em. A centralized scheduler is not
aﬀected by constraints on autonomy of each transaction, sinc e all pending transactions are managed
en masse. The schedulers we consider are deterministic, in t hat they do not resort to randomization.
A scheduler is stable against a given adversary if the number of pending transactions stays
bounded at all times, while new transactions are generated b y the adversary subject to constrains
on the number of new transactions generated in a contiguous s egment of rounds. The primary
measure of performance of a scheduler is the maximum rate of t ransaction generation by the
adversary such that the scheduler can maintain the system st able for this generation rate. If
a given system is stable, as determined by a set of shared obje cts and adversarial constraints
1
=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
Scheduler Lower bound Upper bound
distributed queue-free stability impossible (Section 2)
centralized ρ > max
{ 2
k+1, 2
⌊
√
2m⌋
}
(Section 3) ρ≤ max
{ 1
4k , 1
4⌈√m⌉
}
(Section 4)
distributed queue-based ρ < max
{ 1
6k , 1
6⌈√m⌉
}
(Section 5)
Table 1: A summary of the ranges of rates of transaction gener ation for which deterministic sched-
ulers are stable. The used notations are as follows: m is the number of shared objects, k is the
maximum number of shared objects accessed by a transaction, and ρ is the rate of transaction gen-
eration. Upper bounds limit transaction generation rates f or which stability is achievable. Lower
bounds limit transaction generation rates for which stabil ity is not possible. A lower bound for
centralized schedulers holds a priori for distributed queu e-based schedulers.
on transaction generation and a scheduler of transactions, then upper bounds on the number of
pending transactions at a round and a delay of a transaction’ s execution are used as secondary
performance metrics.
The contributions. We show ﬁrst that no deterministic distributed scheduler in the queue-free
model of transaction autonomy can provide stability for any positive rate of transaction generation.
Let a computer system consist of m shared objects and the adversary be constrained such that ea ch
transaction needs to access at most k of the shared objects. We show that no scheduler can be
stable if a generation rate is greater than max
{ 2
k+1 , 2
⌊
√
2m⌋
}
. We develop a centralized scheduler
that is stable if the transaction generate rate is at most max
{ 1
4k , 1
4⌈√m⌉
}
. We design a distributed
scheduler in the queue-based model of transaction autonomy , in which a transaction is assigned
to an individual processor, that guarantees stability if th e rate of transaction generation is less
than max
{ 1
6k , 1
6⌈√m⌉
}
. For each of the two schedulers we develop, we give upper boun ds on the
queue size and transaction latency in the range of rates of tr ansaction generation for which the
scheduler is stable. Table 1 gives a summary of the ranges of r ates of transaction generation for
which deterministic schedulers are stable.
Related work. Scheduling transactions has been studied for both shared me mory multi-core and
distributed systems. Most of the previous work on schedulin g transactions considered an oﬄine case
where all transactions are known at the outset. Some previou s work considered online scheduling
where a batch of transactions arrives one by one and the perfo rmance of an online scheduler is
compared to a scheduler processing the batch oﬄine. No previ ous work known to the authors of
this paper addressed dynamic transaction arrivals with pot entially inﬁnitely many transactions to
be scheduled in a never-ending execution.
Attiya et al. [3], and Sharma and Busch [15, 16] considered tr ansaction scheduling in distributed
systems with provable performance bounds on communication cost. Transaction scheduling in a
distributed system with the goal of minimizing execution ti me was ﬁrst considered by Zhang et
al. [19]. Busch et al. [6] considered minimizing both the exe cution time and communication cost
simultaneously. They showed that it is impossible to simult aneously minimize execution time
and communication cost for all the scheduling problem insta nces in arbitrary graphs even in the
2
=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
oﬄine setting. Speciﬁcally, Busch et al. [6] demonstrated a tradeoﬀ between minimizing execution
time and communication cost and provided oﬄine algorithms t hat separately optimizw execution
time and communication cost. Busch et al. [7] considered tra nsaction scheduling tailored to speciﬁc
popular topologies and provided oﬄine algorithms that mini mize simultaneously execution time and
communication cost. Busch et al. [8] studied online algorit hms to schedule transactions. Distributed
directory protocols have been designed by Herlihy and Sun [1 4], Sharma and Busch [15], and Zhang
et al. [19], with the goal to optimize communication cost in s cheduling transactions. Zhang and
Ravindran [17] provided a distributed dependency-aware mo del for scheduling transactions in a
distributed system that manages dependencies between conﬂ icting and uncommitted transactions
so that they can commit safely. This model has the inherent tr adeoﬀ between concurrency and
communication cost. Zhang and Ravindran [18] provided cach e-coherence protocols for distributed
transactional memory based on a distributed queuing protoc ol.
Adversarial queuing is a methodology to capture stability o f processing incoming tasks without
any statistical assumptions about task generation. It prov ides a framework to develop worst-case
bounds on performance of deterministic distributed algori thms in a dynamic setting. This approach
to study routing algorithms in store-and-forward networks was proposed by Borodin et al. [5], and
continued by Andrews et al. [2]. Adversarial queuing has bee n applied to other dynamic tasks
in communication networks. Bender et al. [4] considered bro adcasting in multiple-access channels
with queue-free stations in the framework of adversarial qu euing. Chlebus et al. [11] proposed to
investigate deterministic distributed broadcast in multi ple access channels performed by stations
with queues in the adversarial setting. This direction was c ontinued by Chlebus et al. [10] who
studied the maximum throughput in such a setting. Ananthara mu et al. [1] considered packet
latency of deterministic broadcast algorithms with inject ion rates less than 1. Chlebus et al. [9]
studied adversarial routing in multiple-access channels s ubject to energy constraints. Garncarek et
al. [12] investigated adversarial stability of memoryless packet scheduling policies in multiple access
channels. Garncarek et al. [13] studied adversarial commun ication through channels with collisions
between communicating agents represented as graphs.
2 Technical Preliminaries
A computer system includes a ﬁxed set of m shared objects. The system executes an algorithm.
An execution of the algorithm is synchronous in that is parti tioned into time steps, which we call
rounds. The algorithm spawns threads. Each thread generates and ex ecutes one transaction at a
time. The threads communicate through shared objects.
The type of a transaction is the set of objects it may need to access dur ing execution. To
determine the type of a transaction, it suﬃces to read it to li st all the mentioned objects. The
number of objects in a transaction’s type is the weight of this transaction and the type. If the
types of two transactions share an object, then we say that th is creates a conﬂict for access to this
object, and that the transactions involved in a conﬂict for a ccess to an object collide at this object.
A set of transactions with the property that no two diﬀerent tr ansactions in the set collide at some
shared object is called conﬂict free or collision free.
In a queue-free model of transaction autonomy, each transaction is associa ted with a thread,
3
=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
which exists only for the purpose to execute this transactio n and it disappears after the transac-
tion’s execution. In the queue-based model, each transaction is assigned to a group of transactio ns
managed by a processor. All the pending transactions at a pro cessor make its queue.
Scheduling transactions. Transactions are managed by a scheduler. This is an algorithm that
determines for each round which pending transactions are in voked at this round. A centralized
scheduler is an algorithm for the queue-free model that knows all the tr ansactions pending at a
round, can invoke each pending transaction, and receives fe edback from each object about commit-
ting to an invoked transaction or aborting it. In the queue-b ased model, a distributed scheduler is
executed by the processors that communicate among themselv es through the shared objects.
Scheduling transactions is constrained by whether this is a queue-free or queue-based model.
In a queue-free model, if a pending transaction invoked at a r ound is not involved in conﬂict with
any object it needs to access, for any of the transactions inv oked at this round concurrently, then
this transaction is executed successfully. It follows that all transactions in a conﬂict-free set of
transactions can be executed together at one round. Complem entarily, if a pending transaction
invoked at a round is involved in conﬂict for an object it need s to access with some transaction
invoked concurrently then both transaction get aborted at t his round and stay pending. The queue-
based model is more restricted, in that the queue-free model ’s constraints do apply, but additionally,
for each processor, at most one transaction in this processo r’s queue can be performed at a round.
A transaction invoked at a round that executes successfully is no longer pending, while an aborted
transaction stays pending in the next round. In the queue-fr ee model, transactions are managed
en-masse.
Adversaries. We consider a setting in which new transactions arrive conti nuously to the system.
The process of generation of transactions is represented qu antitatively by adversarial models. We
study two types of adversaries corresponding to the queue-f ree and queue-based models. In the
queue-free model, a transaction generated at a round contri butes a unit to the congestion at the
round at each object the transaction includes in its type. Th is is the queue-free adversary. In the
queue-based model, a transaction generated at a round at a pr ocessor contributes a unit to the
congestion at the round at each object the transaction includes in its ty pe and also to the processor
the transaction is generated at. This is the queue-based adversary.
Quantitative restrictions imposed on adversaries are expr essed in terms of bounds on congestion.
A queue-free adversary generates transactions with generation rate ρ and burstiness component b if,
in each contiguous time interval τ of length t and for each shared object, the amount of congestion
created for the object at all the rounds in τ together is at most ρt + b. A queue-based adversary
generates transactions with generation rate ρ and burstiness component b if, in each contiguous time
interval τ of length t and for each shared object and for each processor, the amount of congestion
created for the object at all the rounds in τ together is at most ρt + b and the amount of congestion
created for the processor at all the rounds in τ together is at most ρt + b. For these adversarial
models, we assume that ρ > 0 is a real number and b > 0 is an integer. Each such an adversary is
said to be of type (ρ, b). The burstiness of an adversary is the maximum number of transactions
the adversary can generate in one round. By considering a tim e interval τ of length 1 we obtain
that the burstiness of an adversary of type ( ρ, b) is⌊ρ + b⌋, which is b for ρ < 1.
4
=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
Performance metrics. A scheduler is stable, against a given type of an adversary, if the number
of pending transactions stays bounded in the course of any ex ecution in which transactions are
generated by the adversary of this type. For an object and a ro und number r, at most r transactions
that contributed to congestion at this object can get execut ed in the ﬁrst r rounds. It follows that
no scheduler can be stable if its injection rate is greater th an 1, so we consider only adversaries
of types ( ρ, b) in which 0 < ρ ≤ 1. A transaction’s delay is the number of rounds between the
generation and execution of this transaction. The latency of a scheduler in an execution is the
maximum possible delay of a transaction generated in the exe cution.
Proposition 1 No deterministic distributed scheduler for a system with on e shared object can be
stable against an adversary of type (ρ, 2), for any constant ρ > 0.
Proof: Consider an execution in which the adversary generates two t ransactions that need to access
the only existing object at the ﬁrst round. This is consisten t with the power of the adversary, since
its burstiness is 2. Each transaction is controlled by its th read which executes a deterministic
code. We argue by induction of the round number that in each ro und the states of the threads
are identical. The initialization of each of the threads is t he same so they start in the same initial
state. The threads communicate via the shared object. At a ro und, assuming that the states of
both threads are equal, the threads perform the same action, which is either pausing or invoking
the transaction. Pausing does not generate any feedback fro m the object, so each thread transitions
to the same new state, driven only by the change of the round nu mber. Invoking a transaction
results in receiving feedback indicating conﬂict for acces s and the resulting abort, so each thread
transitions to the same state determined by this feedback. S ince the states of the threads stay the
same at every round, these two transactions will stay pendin g forever.
If the generation rate ρ is positive, then the adversary can generate new two transac tions that
have the object in their types again, after suﬃciently many r ounds of the previous generation have
passed. Such a pattern of repeated generation of pairs of tra nsactions can be repeated indeﬁnitely,
resulting in the number of pending transactions growing unb ounded. □
Coloring graphs. We will use properties of colorings of vertices of simple gra phs. An algorithm
for coloring vertices of a graph that we call primary greedy starts by ordering the vertices in a ﬁxed
order. It will assign colors to vertices in this order. Posit ive natural numbers are used as colors. A
color assigned to a vertex is smallest such that it is diﬀerent from the colors already assigned to the
neighbors. The primary greedy algorithm uses a number of col ors that is at most the maximum
vertex degree plus 1; such a maximum color is assigned to a ver tex v only if v’s degree is maximum,
all its neighbors got colors already assigned, and all these colors are all diﬀerent among themselves.
An algorithm for coloring vertices of a graph that we call alternative greedy begins by ordering
vertices in a ﬁxed order. Then maximal independent sets of ve rtices in induced subgraphs are
found in a greedy manner. To construct a maximal independent set, we process the vertices in the
given order one by one. If no neighbor of a processed vertex ha s been selected yet as a member
of the independent set, then we add the processed vertex to th e independent set, otherwise we
skip it. After all the vertices have been processed, the vert ices in the obtained independent set are
given the same color and get removed from the graph to produce a pruned induced subgraph. This
procedure continues until all the vertices get removed.
5
=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
Proposition 2 The alternative greedy coloring algorithm uses a number of co lors that is at most
the maximum degree plus 1.
Proof: We may interpret an execution of the alternative greedy colo ring with regard to the coloring
produced by the primary greedy algorithm. We show that the or dinal number x of an obtained
independent set consists of all the vertices that get color x assigned by the primary greedy algorithm.
The proof is by induction on the position of a vertex in a given ordering of vertices. The base of
induction is about the ﬁrst vertex in the ordering. This ﬁrst vertex is colored 1 and it also belongs
to the ﬁrst independent set. To show the inductive step, cons ider a vertex v following a block of
vertices already colored. Let y is the smallest available color for vertex v by the primary greedy
coloring. All the numbers less than y represent independent sets in the order they were built, by
the inductive assumption. Once these independent sets are r emoved, the vertex v is placed in the
yth independent set as its ﬁrst element. □
3 A Lower Bound
We show that no scheduler can handle dynamic transactions if a generation rate is suﬃciently
high with respect to the number of shared objects m and an upper bound k on the weight of a
transaction.
If a and b are integers where a≤ b then let [ a, b] denote the set of integers {a, a + 1, . . . , b}. We
begin with a preliminary fact.
Lemma 1 For an integer n > 0, there is a family of sets A1, A2, . . . , An+1, each a subset of
[1, n(n+1)
2 ], such that every set Ai has n elements, any two sets Ai and Aj, for i⁄= j, share an
element, and each element of [1, n(n+1)
2 ] belongs to exactly two sets Ai and Aj, for i⁄= j.
Proof: We start with A1 = [1 , n], then set A2 = {1}∪ [n + 1 , n + ( n− 1)], next set A3 =
{2, n + 1}∪ [2n, 2n− 1 + (n− 2)], and next deﬁne A4 ={3, n + 2, 2n}∪ [3n− 2, 3n− 3 + (n− 2)].
Observe that number 1 is shared by A1 and A2, number 2 is shared by A1 and A3, number 3 is
shared by A1 and A4, number n + 1 is shared by A2 and A3, number n + 2 is shared by A2 and A4.
This is the beginning of a general construction that is recur sive and proceeds as follows.
Suppose we have deﬁned each among the sets A1, . . . , Aℓ, for ℓ≤ n. The set Aℓ+1 contains n
elements, of which the smallest ℓ are the following: the ﬁrst number in A1 that does not belong to
any of the sets A1, . . . , Aℓ except for A1, the ﬁrst number in A2 that does not belong to any of the
sets A1, . . . , Aℓ except for A2, and so on, and ﬁnally the ﬁrst number in Aℓ that does not belong
to any of the sets A1, . . . , Aℓ except for Aℓ. The remaining n− ℓ elements in Aℓ+1 are speciﬁed to
be the smallest n− ℓ positive integers that do not belong to the union of A1, . . . , Aℓ. This process
deﬁnes the sets A1, . . . , Ak, An+1.
By the construction of the sets A1, . . . , Ak, An+1, any two sets Ai and Aj, for 1 ≤ i, j≤ n + 1
and i⁄= j, share exactly one element. Set A1 contributes n integers, set A2 contributes n− 1
integers beyond A1, set A3 contributed n− 2 integers beyond A1∪ A2, and set An contributes one
element beyond A1∪ A2∪ . . .∪ An−1. The set An+1 does not contribute any new elements. The
6
=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
union of A1, . . . , An covers the integers between 1 and n + (n− 1) + ( n− 2) +··· + 1 = n(n+1)
2 ,
which makes the segment of integers [1 , n(n+1)
2 ]. □
Now, we give a lower bound on generation rate to keep scheduli ng stable.
Theorem 1 A queue-free adversary of type (ρ, b) generating transactions for a system of m objects
such that each transaction is of weight at most k can make any scheduling algorithm unstable if
injection rate ρ satisﬁes ρ > max
{ 2
k+1 , 2
⌊
√
2m⌋
}
.
Proof: Let the m objects be denoted as o1, o2, . . . , om. Suppose ﬁrst that k(k+1)
2 ≤ m. The
transactions to be generated will use only the objects o1, o2, . . . , os, where s = k(k+1)
2 .
Let us take the family of sets A1, A2, . . . , Ak+1 as in Lemma 1, in which n is set to k. We will use
a ﬁxed set of transactions T1, T2, . . . , Tk+1 deﬁned such that transaction Ti uses object oj if and only
if j∈ Ai. In particular, each transaction uses k objects. The adversary generates these transactions
listed in order L0, L1, L2, . . ., where Li−1 is the ith transaction generated and Li is a transaction
identical to T1+i mod ( k+1). The adversary generates new transactions at full power, in the sense that
if a transaction can be generated in a given round, subject to the speciﬁcation of the adversary’s
type, that a consecutive transaction is generated. Speciﬁc ally, consider a round r + 1. Let i be
the highest index of a transaction Li generated by round r. Then in round r + 1 the adversary
generates transactions that make a maximal preﬁx of the sequ ence Li+1, Li+2, . . . such that the total
number of transactions generated by round r + 1 satisﬁes the constraints on objects’ congestion of
type ( ρ, b). The adversary may generate no transaction at a round and it may generate multiple
transaction at a round. For example, the adversary generate s exactly the transactions L0, . . . , Lb−1
simultaneously in the ﬁrst round.
By Lemma 1, at most one transaction can be executed at a round. The k + 1 transactions
T1, T2, . . . , Tk+1 require k + 1 rounds to have each one executed, one transaction per roun d. Dis-
counting for the burstiness of generation, which is possibl e due to the burstiness component b in the
type ( ρ, b), these transactions can be generated with a frequency of at most one new transaction
generated per round if the execution is to stay stable.
The group of transactions T1, . . . , Tk+1 together contribute 2 to the congestion of each used
object, by Lemma 1. If an execution is stable then the inequal ity ρ(k + 1)≤ 2 holds. This gives a
bound ρ≤ 2
k+1 on the generation rate of an adversary if the execution is sta ble. In case ρ > 2
k+1 ,
the adversary can generate at least one transaction at every round, and for each round r it can
generate two transactions at some round after r. Such an execution is unstable, because at most
one transaction among T1, . . . , Tk+1 can be executed in one round.
Next, consider the case k(k+1)
2 > m. Let n be the greatest positive integer such that n(n+1)
2 ≤ m.
We use a similar reasoning as in the case k(k+1)
2 ≤ m, with the family of sets A1, A2, . . . , An+1 as in
Lemma 1. In particular, we use a set of transactions T1, T2, . . . , Tn+1 deﬁned such that transaction Ti
uses an object oj if and only if j∈ Ai. The rules of generating new transactions by the adversary
are similar. We obtain the inequality ρ≤ 2
n+1 by the same argument. The inequality n(n+1)
2 ≤ m
implies n + 1 =⌊ 1
2 (1 +√1 + 8m)⌋, by algebra. We have the estimates
2
n + 1 = 2
⌊ 1
2 (1 +√1 + 8m)⌋≤ 2
⌊
√
2m⌋ .
7
=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
Algorithm Centralized-Scheduler
initialize Pending← an empty list
for each round do
append all transactions generated in the previous round at t he tail of list Pending
initialize Execute← an empty set
if Pending is nonempty then
repeat
(a) entry← ﬁrst unprocessed list item on Pending, starting from head towards tail
(b) if entry is conﬂict-free with all the transactions in Execute then
remove entry from Pending and add it to set Execute
until entry points at the tail of list Pending
execute all the transactions in Execute
Figure 1: A pseudocode of the algorithm scheduling all pendi ng transactions en masse. Transactions
pending execution are stored in a list Pending in the order of generation, with the oldest at the head.
The set Execute includes transactions to execute at a round. It is selected i n a greedy manner,
prioritizing older transactions over newer and avoiding co nﬂicts for access to shared objects.
If ρ > 2
⌊
√
2m⌋ then also ρ > 2
n+1 . It follows that if the adversary is of a type ( ρ, b) such that
ρ > 2
⌊
√
2m⌋ , then this adversary generating transactions at full power can generate at least one
transaction at every round, and for each round r it can generate two transactions at some round
after r. This makes the queue of transactions grow unbounded. □
4 A Centralized Scheduler
We present a scheduling algorithm that processes all transa ctions pending at a round. The al-
gorithm is centralized in that it is aware of all the pending t ransactions while selecting the ones
to be executed at a round. Throughout this Section we assume t he queue-free model of auton-
omy of individual transactions, and the corresponding queu e-free adversarial model of transaction
generation.
The centralized scheduler identiﬁes a conﬂict-free set of t ransactions pending execution that is
maximal with respect to inclusion among all pending transac tions. This is accomplished by ﬁrst
ordering all pending transaction on the time of generation a nd then processing them greedily one
by one in this order. The word ‘greedily’ in this context mean s passing over a transaction only when
its type includes an object that belongs to the type of a trans action already selected for execution
at the current round.
The algorithm is called Centralized-Scheduler, its pseudocode is given in Figure 1. The
variable Pending denotes a list of all pending transactions. At the beginning of a round, all newly
generated transactions are appended to the tail of this list . The list is processed in the order from
head to tail, which prioritizes transactions on their arriv al time, such that those generated earlier
get processed before these generated later. The transactio ns already selected for execution are
stored in the set Execute. If a transaction in Pending is processed, it is checked for conﬂicts with
8
=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
transactions already placed in the set Execute. If a processed transaction does not collide with
any transaction already in Execute then it is removed from Pending and added to Execute, and
otherwise it is passed over. After the whole list Pending have been scanned, all the transactions in
Execute get executed concurrently. No invoked transaction is abort ed in the resulting execution,
because conﬂicts of transactions are avoided by the process to add transactions to the set Execute.
Lemma 2 A set of transactions in Execute obtained at the beginning of a round makes a set of
transactions that is maximal with respect to inclusion amon g subsets of transactions in the list
Pending that are conﬂict-free.
Proof: The list Pending is scanned systematically, by line (a) and the condition con trolling the
repeat-loop in the pseudocode in Figure 1. A processed trans action is added to the set Execute if
and only if it is free of conﬂicts with all the transactions al ready placed in Execute, by line (b) in
the pseudocode in Figure 1. This shows that the set Execute produced after completing the repeat
loop is conﬂict free. This set is maximal with this property, because a transaction not in Execute
that could possibly be added was considered in line (a) at som e point and not added, which means
a conﬂict was detected. □
The list Pending is updated at the very beginning of a round by adding all newly generated
transactions. At any round in which there are pending transa ctions, some set of transactions gets
invoked successfully, by Lemma 2. This means each generated transaction is eventually executed.
To assess the eﬃciency of executing transactions, let us par tition an execution of the algorithm
Centralized-Scheduler into contiguous milestone intervals of rounds, denoted I1, I2, I3, . . .,
such that the length of each interval equals 4 b· min{k,⌈√m⌉} rounds.
The transactions pending in a milestone interval Ik at any time are categorized into old and
new : the former are those generated prior to the start of Ik and the latter are those generated
during Ik. We interpret all the old transactions at the beginning of a r ound of execution of algo-
rithm Centralized-Scheduler in interval Ij+1 as forming a transaction conﬂict graph , or simply
conﬂict graph in this Section. Such a graph has old transactions as vertice s and two old transac-
tions are connected by an edge if and only if they collide. The ﬁrst round of the interval Ij+1
has the biggest such a graph among all the rounds in the interv al. Each following round results in
pruning the graph of vertices to produce an induced subgraph . The conﬂict graph evolves through
a sequence of diﬀerent induced subgraphs in interval Ij+1, unless these subgraphs become empty.
Let us assume the adversary generates transactions with a ra te ρ≤ max
{ 1
4k , 1
4⌈√m⌉
}
and with
a burstiness b≥ 1. The total contribution to congestion of an object by trans actions generated
during a milestone interval can be estimated as follows:
max
{ 1
4k , 1
4⌈√m⌉
}
· 4b· min{k,⌈√m⌉} + b≤ b + b = 2b. (1)
It follows that the sum of weights of transactions generated in a milestone interval is at most 2 bm.
Since a transaction uses at least one object, the adversary c an generate at most 2 bm transactions
in a milestone interval.
We show the following invariant for all milestone intervals of an execution.
9
=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
Lemma 3 ( Centralized milestone invariant) If a generation rate satisﬁes ρ≤ max
{ 1
4k , 1
4⌈√m⌉
}
,
then there are at most 2bm pending transactions at the ﬁrst round of a milestone interv al, and all
these transactions get executed by the end of the interval.
Proof: The invariant pertains to at most 2 bm old pending transactions. We show the centralized
milestone invariant by induction on the index of interval.
The base case concerns interval I1. The invariant holds because there are no transactions
generated prior to this interval. To show the inductive step , suppose it holds for an interval Ij and
consider interval Ij+1. By the inductive assumption, all the old transactions in Ij+1 got generated
during interval Ij. It follows that there are at most 2 bm old transactions at the beginning of Ij+1.
We show next that all the old transactions pending in such an i nterval Ij+1 get executed by the
end of Ij+1.
An execution of algorithm Centralized-Scheduler during interval Ij+1 can be interpreted
as an execution of the alternative greedy coloring of the con ﬂict graph, as the graph is determined
at the ﬁrst round of Ij+1, by Lemma 2. The consecutive round numbers in interval Ij+1 could be
interpreted as colors. By Proposition 2, the number of assig ned colors is at most the maximum
degree plus 1. The old transactions make a preﬁx of the list of all pending transactions, by how
new transactions get added to list Pending, by the pseudocode in Figure 1. This means that
new transactions get considered at a round only after all the old transactions had a chance to
be scheduled and added to Execute, and so they do not get in the way of old transactions. The
maximum assigned color is the last round in which all old tran sactions get completed.
Since each transaction uses at most k objects and each object belongs to at most 2 b old transac-
tions, by the bound (1), each old transaction collides with a t most (2 b− 1)k other old transactions.
It follows that the maximum degree of the conﬂict graph is at m ost (2 b− 1)k. The alternative
greedy coloring assigns at most (2 b− 1)k + 1 colors. This is also an upper bound on the number of
rounds spent to complete executing all old transactions.
To show the inductive step, it suﬃces to demonstrate that the length of interval Ij+1 is an
upper bound on the number of colors assigned to the vertices o f a graph of old transactions by the
greedy coloring. We consider two cases, depending on the rel ative magnitude of k and⌈√m⌉.
Suppose ﬁrst that k≤⌈√m⌉. The length of each milestone interval is 4 bk, which is strictly
greater than the maximum vertex degree. This is because the i nequality
4bk > (2b− 1)k + 1 = 2 bk− k + 1
is equivalent to 2 bk >−k + 1, which holds since both b≥ 1 and k≥ 1.
The other case is k >⌈√m⌉. Let us call an old transaction heavy if its weight is greater than
⌈√m⌉ and light if its weight is at most ⌈√m⌉. There are at most 2 b⌈√m⌉ heavy old transactions, as
otherwise the total weight of old transactions would be stri ctly greater than 2 b⌈√m⌉·√m≥ 2bm,
which is impossible. Suppose conservatively that if a heavy transaction is scheduled to be executed
at a round then this is the only transaction executed at this r ound. There are at most 2 b⌈√m⌉ such
rounds. The remaining rounds in the interval execute light t ransactions only. We interpret these
rounds as belonging to an execution of the alternative greed y coloring. The subgraph induced by
light transactions has maximum degree at most (2 b−1)⌈√m⌉, and so at most (2 b−1)⌈√m⌉+1 colors
10
=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
get assigned, each color representing a round. To combine th e outcomes of these two counts, there
are at most 2 b⌈√m⌉ rounds needed to execute heavy transactions and at most (2 b− 1)⌈√m⌉ + 1
rounds to execute light transactions, for a total of these ma ny rounds:
2b⌈√m⌉ + (2b− 1)⌈√m⌉ + 1 = (4 b− 1)⌈√m⌉ + 1 .
The length of a milestone interval is 4 b·⌈√m⌉ rounds. By its end all old transactions are completed,
because the inequality
(4b− 1)⌈√m⌉ + 1≤ 4b·⌈√m⌉
is equivalent to ⌈√m⌉ ≥1. This completes the proof of the inductive step of the centr alized
milestone invariant. □
We show next that algorithm Centralized-Scheduler is stable and has bounded transaction
latency for suitably low transaction generation rates.
Theorem 2 If algorithm Centralized-Scheduler is executed against an adversary of type
(ρ, b), such that each generated transaction accesses at most k objects out of m shared objects avail-
able and transaction-generation rate ρ satisﬁes ρ≤ max
{ 1
4k , 1
4⌈√m⌉
}
, then the number of pending
transactions at a round is at most 4bm and transaction latency is at most 8b· min{k,⌈√m⌉}.
Proof: To estimate the number of transactions pending at a round, le t this round belong to a
milestone interval Ik. The number of old transactions at any round of Ik is at most 2 mb, by the
centralized milestone invariant formulated as Lemma 3. Dur ing the interval Ik, at most 2 mb new
transactions can be generated. So 2 mb + 2mb = 4mb is an upper bound on the number of pending
transactions at the round.
To estimate transaction latency, we use the property that a t ransaction generated in a milestone
interval gets executed by the end of the next interval, again by the centralized milestone invariant
formulated as Lemma 3. This means that transaction latency i s at most twice the length of a
milestone interval, which is 2 · 4b· min{k,⌈√m⌉} = 8b· min{k,⌈√m⌉}. □
5 A Distributed Scheduler
We now consider distributed scheduling. Let a distributed s ystem consist of n processors. The
processors issue threads that communicate among themselve s through some m shared objects.
Every transaction type includes at most k objects.
Each generated transaction is assigned to a speciﬁc process or and resides in its local queue
while pending execution. This means we consider the queue-b ased model of autonomy of individual
transactions, and the corresponding queue-based adversar ial model of transaction generation.
We employ a speciﬁc communication mechanism between a pair o f processors. One of the
processors, say s, is a sender and the other processor, say r, is a receiver. The two processors s
and r communicate through a designated object o. Communication occurs at a given round. All
the processors are aware that this particular round is a roun d of communication from s to r. Each
of the participants s and r may invoke a transaction involving object o at the round, while at the
same time all the remaining processors pause and do not invok e any transactions at this round.
11
=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
Assume ﬁrst that both s and r have pending transactions that access object o. At a round of
communication, the recipient processor r invokes a transaction tr that uses object o. If the sender
processor s wants to convey bit 1 then s also invokes a transaction ts that uses object o. In this case,
both transactions tr and ts get aborted, so that the processor r receives the respective feedback
from the system and interprets it as receiving 1. If the sende r processor s wants to convey bit 0 then
s does not invoke any transactions using object o at this round. In this case, transaction tr gets
executed successfully, so that r receives the respective feedback from the system and interp rets it
as receiving 0. This is how one bit can be transmitted success fully from a sender s to a recipient r.
That was an example of a perfect cooperation between a sender and receiver, but alternative
scenarios are possible as well. Suppose that the sender s has a pending transaction using object o
and wants to communicate with r but the recipient r either does not want to communicate or
does not have a pending transaction using object o. What occurs is that s invokes a suitable
transaction ts which gets executed but r does not receive any information. Alternatively, suppose
that the receiver r has a pending transaction using object o and wants to communicate while the
sender s either does not want to communicate or does not have a pending transaction using object o.
What occurs is that the receiver r invokes a suitable transaction tr which gets executed, which the
receiver r interprets as receiving the bit 0.
That communication mechanism can be extended to transmit th e whole type of any transaction
in the following way. The type identiﬁes a subset of all m objects. Having a ﬁxed ordering of the
objects, the type can be represented as a sequence of m bits, in which 1 at position i represents
that the ith object belongs to the type, and 0 represents that the ith object does not belong. A
processor s can transmit a transaction type to recipient r by transmitting m bits representing the
type in m successive rounds while using some designated object o. We say that by this operation
processor s sends the transaction type to processor r via object o. This operation works as desired
assuming each of the processors has at least m transactions involving object o. If at least one
of these processors either does not have m transactions involving object o or does not want to
participate, then either no bits are transmitted, or the rec eiver r possibly receives a sequence of 0s
only, which it interprets as no type of transaction successf ully transmitted.
Pending transactions at a processor are grouped by their typ es. All pending transactions of the
same type at a processor make a block of transactions of this type. The weight of a block is deﬁned
to be the weight of its type. If there are suﬃciently many tran sactions in a block then the block
and the type are said to be large. A boundary number deﬁning sizes to be large is denoted by L
and equals L = (n− 1)2n2m2. If the number of transactions of some type in a queue at a proc essor
is at least kL but less than ( k + 1)L, for a positive integer k, then we treat these transactions as
contributing k large blocks.
An execution of the scheduling algorithm is partitioned int o epochs, and each consecutive epoch
consists of three phases, labeled Phase 1, Phase 2, and Phase 3. Each phase is executed the same
number of L = ( n− 1)2n2m2 rounds. The algorithm is called Distributed-Scheduler and its
pseudocode is given in Figure 2.
In the beginning of Phase 1, each processor v that has a large block of transactions of some type,
selects one such a block, and this type then is active at the processor in the epoch. A processor
that starts Phase 1 with an active type is called active in this phase. Processors store large blocks
12
=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
Algorithm Distributed-Scheduler
Phase 1 : sharing information about large active blocks during L rounds
repeat n− 1 times
for each sender processor s and each recipient processor r and each object o do
in a segment of rounds assigned for this selection of s, r, and o:
if v is active and this is a round when s = v then
act as sender to transmit all relevant information to r via object o
elseif v is active and this is a round when r = v then
act as recipient to receive all relevant information from s via object o
Phase 2 : executing large blocks of transactions during L rounds
if v is active then
select active blocks for execution among those learned in Ph ase 1
if v is active and its active block got selected then
for each among L consecutive rounds do
if there is a transaction of the active type in the queue then
invoke such a transaction
Phase 3 : executing remaining transactions by solo processors in L rounds
for L consecutive rounds
if this is a round among L/n ones assigned to v then
if the queue is nonempty then invoke a transaction
Figure 2: A pseudocode of an epoch for a processor v. Pending transactions are dispersed among
the processors. Number L = ( n− 1)2n2m2 is the duration of each phase. In Phase 1, processors
s and r use transactions from their active large blocks to implemen t communication. A sender
processor s transmits the active type for each processor it knows about. In Phase 2, large active
blocks are selected for execution in a greedy manner, with bl ocks ordered by the processors’ names.
In Phase 3, each processor gets assigned a unique exclusive c ontiguous segment of L/n rounds, in
which to execute up to L/n transactions from its queue in a ﬁrst-in ﬁrst-out manner.
in the order of generation of their last-added transaction. Each processor chooses as active a large
block that comes ﬁrst in this order.
The purpose of Phase 1 is to spread the information of active t ypes of all the active processors
as widely as possible. Each active processor uses transacti ons of its active type for communication.
Such communication involves executing transactions, so a b lock of transactions of a given type may
gradually get smaller. Once a type of a large block becomes ac tive in the beginning of Phase 1,
it stays considered as active for the durations of an epoch, e ven if the number of transactions in
the block becomes less than L. Phase 1 assigns segments of ( n− 1)n2m2 rounds for each pair of
processors s and r and each object o to spend with s acting as sender to r acting as receiver with
communication performed via object o.
Phase 2 is spent on executing transactions in some active blo cks selected such that they do not
create conﬂicts for access to shared objects. In the beginni ng of Phase 2, each processor computes a
selection of active large blocks of transactions to execute in Phase 2 among those learned in Phase 1.
13
=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
This common selection is computed greedily as follows. The a ctive types learned in Phase 1 are
ordered by the owners’ names. There is a working set of active types selected for execution, which
is initialized empty. The active types are considered one by one. If a processed active type can
be added to the working set without creating a conﬂict for acc ess to an object, then the type is
added to the set, and otherwise it is passed over. This comput ation is performed locally by each
active processor at the beginning of the ﬁrst round of Phase 2 and each active processor obtains the
same output. The rounds of Phase 2 are spent on executing the t ransactions of the active blocks
selected for execution. An active processor whose active la rge block has been selected executes
pending transactions in its selected active block as long as some transactions from the block are
still available in the queue or Phase 2 is over, whichever hap pens earlier.
Phase 3 is spent by each processor executing solo its pending transactions, those that have never
been included in large blocks. Each processor is assigned a u nique exclusive contiguous segment of
L/n = (n− 1)2nm2 rounds to execute such transactions. Transactions are perf ormed in the order
of their adding to the queue, with those waiting longest exec uted before those generated later.
Let P = ∑ k
i=1
( m
i
)
be the number of possible diﬀerent transaction types in a syst em of m shared
objects such that a type includes at most k objects. We will use the estimate P ≤ 2H( k
m ) m, for
k≤ m
2 , where H( x) is the binary entropy function H( x) = x lg x + (1− x) lg(1− x) for 0 < x < 1.
We partition the rounds of an execution of algorithm Distributed-Scheduler into contigu-
ous milestone intervals denoted I1, I2, . . .. Each milestone interval consists of 2 bnP· min{k,⌈√m⌉}
epochs. Alternatively, a milestone interval consists of 6 bnLP· min{k,⌈√m⌉} rounds, after trans-
lating the lengths of epochs into rounds.
The transactions pending in an interval Ik at any time are categorized into old and new : the
former are those generated prior to the start of Ik and the latter are those generated during Ik.
We also apply this terminology to large blocks of transactio ns, and categorize them accordingly: a
large old block of transactions is a large block that consists of only old tra nsactions.
We deﬁne a simple graph called block conﬂict graph , or simply a conﬂict graph in this Section.
Vertices are speciﬁed to be pairs ( v, S) where v is a processor and S is a large old block at v.
Two vertices are connected by an edge if either they share the same processor name, as its ﬁrst
coordinate, or the types of large old blocks, in the second co ordinates, share an object. Observe
that, for each processor v, a subgraph induced by all vertices with the same ﬁrst coordi nate v is a
clique.
The block conﬂict graph allows to interpret the range of comm unication during Phase 1 in an
epoch. Namely, Phase 1 results in every processor v learning the active types in all vertices of the
connected component of the block conﬂict graph to which vert ices ( v, S) belong. The duration of
a phase L is determined such as to have suﬃciently many rounds to accom plish this goal.
Lemma 4 After completion of Phase 1, every processor v knows the active transaction type of
each processor in the connected component of the block conﬂi ct graph to which vertices with the ﬁrst
coordinate v belong.
Proof: In the beginning of an epoch, each processor having a large bl ock selects one large block
of transactions as active. A block’s type can be encoded by a s tring of bits, of which at least
one is a 1, as 1s indicate objects in the type. The use of an obje ct for communication for each
14
=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
sender-receiver pair is exclusive. If a receiving processo r obtains a string of bits that includes at
least one occurrence of 1, then this is a legitimate type. Oth erwise, if a receiver does not receive
any sequence of bits or it decodes a transmission of a type as a sequence of only 0s, then this means
that no type was communicated. This demonstrates the correc tness of transmitting a type between
a pair of processors.
Next, we show that the length L of Phase 1 is suﬃciently large for the relevant information t o
successfully propagate to reach every processor. Any piece of information will need to be transmit-
ted at most n− 1 times, as there are n processors. The number of ordered pairs of a sender and a
receiver is n(n− 1). A pair of communicating processors may use one among m shared objects at
an instance of communication. The information to propagate pertains to each of the n processors.
A type is encoded by m bits. The length of Phase 1 is a product of all these numbers, s o its value
allows for the needed communication to propagate. □
Lemma 5 A set of active types obtained in the beginning of Phase 2 by an active processor is max-
imal with respect to inclusion among subsets of active types , in the processor’s connected component
in the block conﬂict graph, that are conﬂict free.
Proof: Each active processor knows all the active types of processo rs in its connected component
of the block conﬂict graph, by Lemma 4. All the active process ors in a connected component work
with the same list of active types ordered by the names of acti ve processors. Each processor selects
types of blocks greedily based on the same rules of selecting blocks to add to a working set of blocks
to execute. So each active processor in a connected componen t produces the same list of active
types.
Each active large block S at a processor v is represented as a pair ( v, S). This pair belongs to a
clique induced of all such pairs that share the ﬁrst componen t. The sub-graph of the block conﬂict
graph induced by the pending large old blocks can be partitio ned into such cliques. Each vertex
(v, S) in the conﬂict graph for an active vertex v is a neighbor of a vertex ( v, S′) with an active
large old block S′. It follows that a maximal independent set among the active v ertices is also such
in the whole conﬂict graph. □
Let us assume that the adversary generates transactions wit h a rate ρ < max
{ 1
6k , 1
6⌈√m⌉
}
and
with a burstiness b≥ 1. Let us call the number nLP the bulk of the system. The contribution
to congestion of any object and of any processor by the transa ctions generated during a milestone
interval, with a generation rate ρ, can be bounded above as follows:
ρ· 6bnLP· min{k,⌈√m⌉} + b≤ bnLP , (2)
assuming the bulk of the system nLP is at least 1
1− 6ρ min{k,⌈√m⌉} . We refer to this assumption about
he bulk of the system by saying that the bulk of the system is suﬃciently large for a generation
rate ρ, where the generation rate ρ satisﬁes ρ < max
{ 1
6k , 1
6⌈√m⌉
}
, for the given parameters m and k.
A large block at a processor contributes L to the congestion of every object of its type, and also
a priori to the congestion of the processor. The number of lar ge blocks contributing to congestion
of a processor is this processor’s block congestion. The number of large blocks contributing to
congestion of an object is this object’s block congestion.
15
=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
The contribution to a block congestion of a processor during a milestone interval is at most
bnP = C, by (2), if only the bulk of the system is suﬃciently large for a generation rate ρ, where
ρ < max
{ 1
6k , 1
6⌈√m⌉
}
. Similarly, the contribution to a block congestion of an obj ect during a
milestone interval is at most bnP = C, by (2), if only the bulk of the system is suﬃciently large
for a generation rate ρ, where ρ < max
{ 1
6k , 1
6⌈√m⌉
}
. The sum of block congestions generated in an
interval over all objects is at most Cm. A large block uses at least one object, so the adversary can
generate at most Cm large blocks in a milestone interval.
Next, we show the following invariant for all milestone inte rvals of an execution of algorithm
Distributed-Scheduler.
Lemma 6 ( Distributed milestone invariant) For a generation rate ρ < max
{ 1
6k , 1
6⌈√m⌉
}
, and as-
suming the bulk of the system is suﬃciently large with respec t to ρ, there are at most bn5m3P
pending transactions at a ﬁrst round of every milestone inte rval, and all these transactions get
executed by the end of the interval.
Proof: The invariant concerns old transactions in a milestone inte rval. We show the invariant by
induction on the index of a milestone interval.
The base case concerns interval I1. The invariant holds because there are no transactions
generated prior to this interval. To show the inductive step , suppose it holds for an interval Ij, and
consider interval Ij+1. By the inductive assumption, all the old transactions in Ij+1 got generated
during interval Ij.
First, let us consider old transactions that do not belong to large old blocks. Every old trans-
action that does not belong to large old blocks gets executed during the third phases of the epochs
in interval Ij+1. To show this, observe that there are no collisions in the thi rd phases of epoch so it
suﬃces to count the number of such transactions. There are fe wer than LP such old transactions
at a processor, since L transactions of some type make a large block and there are at m ost P types.
A milestone interval consists of 6 bnLP· min{k,⌈√m⌉} rounds, so there are 6 bLP· min{k,⌈√m⌉}
rounds assigned to each processor during Phase 3, which is gr eater than LP .
Next, let us consider large old blocks. The types of transact ions selected for execution in Phase 2
do not collide, so no transaction is ever aborted in Phase 2. T o see this, suppose otherwise, that the
two active processors include the same object in their respe ctive active types. The two processors
eventually communicate in the epoch, because they try each s hared object as a communication
medium. This communication is successful when some shared o bject is used for communication, so
the processors learn of their respective active types.
By the inductive assumption, there are at most Cm large old blocks of transactions at the begin-
ning of Ij+1. This means a total of at most bnmP large blocks, which makes nbmLP transactions.
We show next that all large old blocks in interval Ij+1 get executed by the end of Ij+1.
At the start of the ﬁrst epoch in the interval Ij+1, the block conﬂict graph is determined by old
transactions only, those that make large blocks. For the sak e of the analysis, we consider this very
graph during epochs in the milestone interval Ij+1, disregarding new transactions generated in the
meantime. The graph evolves through consecutive epochs in t he interval. Each of the following
epochs contributes to pruning the original block conﬂict gr aph to produce an induced subgraph of
16
=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
the original graph. These subgraphs evolve in interval Ij+1 through a sequence of diﬀerent induced
subgraphs, to stabilize when they become empty.
An execution of algorithm Distributed-Scheduler during interval Ij+1 can be interpreted
as an execution of the alternative greedy coloring of the blo ck conﬂict graph as it is determined
at the ﬁrst epoch of Ij+1, by Lemma 5. The consecutive epoch numbers in interval Ij+1 could be
interpreted as colors. By Proposition 2, the number of assig ned colors is at most the maximum
degree of the block conﬂict graph plus 1. Large blocks of tran sactions are made active during an
epoch in the order of their creation. The maximum assigned co lor is the last round in which all
large old blocks of transactions get completed.
The contribution to a processor congestion during a milesto ne interval is at most bnP = C,
by (2). Since each transaction uses at most k objects and each object belongs to at most C old
blocks, by the bound (2), each old block collides with at most (C− 1)k other old blocks. It follows
that the maximum degree of the block conﬂict graph is at most C− 1 + (C− 1)k. The alternative
greedy coloring assigns at most these many colors:
(C− 1)k + C = Ck− k + C≤ C(k + 1) . (3)
This is also an upper bound on the number of epochs spent to com plete executing all old blocks.
To show the inductive step, we consider two cases, depending on the relative magnitude of k
and⌈√m⌉. It suﬃces to demonstrate that the number of epochs in the int erval Ij+1 is an upper
bound on the number of colors assigned to the vertices of a gra ph of old blocks by a greedy coloring.
Suppose ﬁrst that k≤⌈√m⌉. The number of epochs of a milestone interval is 2 Ck , which is at
least as large as the number of colors of the block conﬂict gra ph assigned by the greedy coloring
and estimated in (3). This is because the inequality
2Ck≥ C(k + 1) = Ck + C
is equivalent to Ck≥ C, which holds since both C≥ 1 and k≥ 1.
The other case is k >⌈√m⌉. Let us call an old block heavy if its weight is greater than ⌈√m⌉
and light if its weight is at most ⌈√m⌉. There are at most C⌈√m⌉ heavy old transactions, as
otherwise the total weight of old blocks would be strictly gr eater than C⌈√m⌉·√m≥ Cm, which
is impossible. Suppose, conservatively, that if a heavy blo ck is scheduled to be executed during the
second phase of an epoch then this is the only active block exe cuted at this phase of this epoch.
There are at most C⌈√m⌉ such epochs. The remaining epochs in the interval execute li ght blocks
during their second phases. We interpret these epochs/phas es as representing an execution of the
alternative greedy coloring. The subgraph induced by verti ces of the form ( v, S), where S is a light
large block, is colored by at most C(⌈√m⌉) colors, by (3) and the inequality ⌈√m⌉ < k .
To combine all this together, observe that there are at most C⌈√m⌉ epochs needed to execute
heavy transactions in their second phases, and at most C⌈√m⌉ epochs to execute light transactions
in their second phases, for a total of these many epochs: C⌈√m⌉+C⌈√m⌉ = 2C⌈√m⌉. A milestone
interval consists of these many epochs:
2nP b·⌈√m⌉ = 2C⌈√m⌉ ,
so by its end all large old blocks get completed during second phases.
17
=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
This completes the proof of the inductive step of the distrib uted milestone invariant. The
number of old transactions in a milestone interval is at most bnmLP , by (2). This bound means
at most bn5m3 P old transactions. □
Next, we show that algorithm Distributed-Scheduler is stable and has bounded transaction
latency for suitably low transaction generation rates.
Theorem 3 If algorithm Distributed-Scheduler is executed against an adversary of type (ρ, b),
such that each generated transaction accesses at most k ≤ m
2 objects out of m shared objects
available, and transaction-generation rate ρ satisﬁes ρ < max
{ 1
6k , 1
6⌈√m⌉
}
, and the bulk of the
system is suﬃciently large with respect to ρ, then the number of pending transactions at a round is
at most 2bn5m3 2H( k
m )m and transaction latency is at most 12bn5m2 2H( k
m )m min{k,⌈√m⌉}.
Proof: To estimate the number of transactions pending at a round, le t this round belong to a
milestone interval Ik. The number of old transactions at any round of the interval Ik is at most
bn5m3P , by the distributed milestone invariant formulated as Lemm a 6. During the interval Ik, at
most bn5m3P new transactions can be generated, again by Lemma 6, because they will become old
when the next interval begins. So 2 bn5m3P≤ 2bn5m3 2H( k
m )m is an upper bound on the number
of pending transactions at any round, since P = ∑ k
i=1
( m
i
)
≤ 2H( k
m )m for k≤ m
2 .
To estimate the transaction latency, we use the property tha t a transaction generated in an
interval gets executed by the end of the next interval, again by the distributed milestone invariant
formulated as Lemma 6. This means that transaction latency i s at most twice the length of an
interval, which is 2 · 6bnLP min{k,⌈√m⌉}, where L = ( n− 1)2n2m2. We obtain that the latency
is at most 12 bn5m2 2H( k
m )m min{k,⌈√m⌉}. □
References
[1] Lakshmi Anantharamu, Bogdan S. Chlebus, Dariusz R. Kowa lski, and Mariusz A. Rokicki.
Packet latency of deterministic broadcasting in adversari al multiple access channels. Journal
of Computer and System Sciences , 99:27–52, 2019.
[2] Matthew Andrews, Baruch Awerbuch, Antonio Fern´ andez, Frank Thomson Leighton, Zhiyong
Liu, and Jon M. Kleinberg. Universal-stability results and performance bounds for greedy
contention-resolution protocols. Journal of the ACM , 48(1):39–69, 2001.
[3] Hagit Attiya, Vincent Gramoli, and Alessia Milani. Dire ctory protocols for distributed transac-
tional memory. In Transactional Memory. Foundations, Algorithms, Tools, an d Applications ,
volume 8913 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 367–391. Springer, 2015.
[4] Michael A. Bender, Martin Farach-Colton, Simai He, Brad ley C. Kuszmaul, and Charles E.
Leiserson. Adversarial contention resolution for simple c hannels. In Proceedings of the 17th
ACM Symposium on Parallel Algorithms and Architectures (SPA A), pages 325–332, 2005.
[5] Allan Borodin, Jon M. Kleinberg, Prabhakar Raghavan, Ma dhu Sudan, and David P.
Williamson. Adversarial queuing theory. Journal of the ACM , 48(1):13–38, 2001.
18
=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
[6] Costas Busch, Maurice Herlihy, Miroslav Popovic, and Go karna Sharma. Time-communication
impossibility results for distributed transactional memo ry. Distributed Computing, 31(6):471–
487, 2018.
[7] Costas Busch, Maurice Herlihy, Miroslav Popovic, and Go karna Sharma. Fast scheduling in
distributed transactional memory. Theory of Computing Systems , 65(2):296–322, 2021.
[8] Costas Busch, Maurice Herlihy, Miroslav Popovic, and Go karna Sharma. Dynamic scheduling
in distributed transactional memory. Distributed Computing , 35(1):19–36, 2022.
[9] Bogdan S. Chlebus, Elijah Hradovich, Tomasz Jurdzi´ nsk i, Marek Klonowski, and Dariusz R.
Kowalski. Energy eﬃcient adversarial routing in shared cha nnels. In Proceedings of the 31st
ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architecture s (SPAA) , pages 191–200.
ACM, 2019.
[10] Bogdan S. Chlebus, Dariusz R. Kowalski, and Mariusz A. R okicki. Maximum throughput of
multiple access channels in adversarial environments. Distributed Computing , 22(2):93–116,
2009.
[11] Bogdan S. Chlebus, Dariusz R. Kowalski, and Mariusz A. R okicki. Adversarial queuing on the
multiple access channel. ACM Transactions on Algorithms , 8(1):5:1–5:31, 2012.
[12] Pawel Garncarek, Tomasz Jurdzinski, and Dariusz R. Kow alski. Stable memoryless queuing
under contention. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Symposium on Distributed Com-
puting (DISC) , volume 146 of LIPIcs, pages 17:1–17:16. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum
f¨ ur Informatik, 2019.
[13] Pawel Garncarek, Tomasz Jurdzinski, and Dariusz R. Kow alski. Eﬃcient local medium access.
In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectu res
(SPAA), pages 247–257. ACM, 2020.
[14] Maurice Herlihy and Ye Sun. Distributed transactional memory for metric-space networks.
Distributed Computing , 20(3):195–208, 2007.
[15] Gokarna Sharma and Costas Busch. Distributed transact ional memory for general networks.
Distributed Computing , 27(5):329–362, 2014.
[16] Gokarna Sharma and Costas Busch. A load balanced direct ory for distributed shared memory
objects. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing , 78:6–24, 2015.
[17] Bo Zhang and Binoy Ravindran. Brief announcement: on en hancing concurrency in distributed
transactional memory. In Andr´ ea W. Richa and Rachid Guerra oui, editors, Proceedings of the
29th Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Comput ing, PODC 2010, Zurich,
Switzerland, July 25-28, 2010 , pages 73–74. ACM, 2010.
[18] Bo Zhang and Binoy Ravindran. Brief announcement: queu ing or priority queuing? on the
design of cache-coherence protocols for distributed trans actional memory. In Andr´ ea W. Richa
and Rachid Guerraoui, editors, Proceedings of the 29th Annual ACM Symposium on Principles
19
=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
of Distributed Computing, PODC 2010, Zurich, Switzerland, J uly 25-28, 2010 , pages 75–76.
ACM, 2010.
[19] Bo Zhang, Binoy Ravindran, and Roberto Palmieri. Distr ibuted transactional contention man-
agement as the traveling salesman problem. In Proceedings of the 21st International Colloquium
on Structural Information and Communication Complexity (SIROCCO 2014), volume 8576 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 54–67. Springer, 2014.
20