=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
OptSmart: A Space Efﬁcient Optimistic Concurrent
Execution of Smart Contracts⋆
Parwat Singh Anjana†, Sweta Kumari‡, Sathya Peri†, Sachin Rathor†,
and Archit Somani‡
†Department of CSE, Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, Telangana, India
‡Department of Computer Science, Technion, Israel
Abstract
Popular blockchains such as Ethereum and several others execute complex transac-
tions in blocks through user-deﬁned scripts known assmart contracts. Serial execution
of smart contract transactions/atomic-units (AUs) fails to harness the multiprocessing
power offered by the prevalence of multi-core processors. By adding concurrency to
the execution of AUs, we can achieve better efﬁciency and higher throughput.
In this paper, we develop a concurrent miner that proposes a block by executing the
AUs concurrently using optimistic Software Transactional Memory systems (STMs) .
It captures the independent AUs in a concurrent bin and dependent AUs in the block
graph (BG) efﬁciently. Later, we propose a concurrent validator that re-executes the
same AUs concurrently and deterministically using a concurrent bin followed by BG
given by the miner to verify the block. We rigorously prove the correctness of concur-
rent execution of AUs and show signiﬁcant performance gain than state-of-the-art.
Keywords: Blockchain, Smart Contracts, Software Transactional Memory System,
Multi-version, Concurrency Control, Opacity
⋆A preliminary version of this paper appeared in 27 th Euromicro International Conference On Parallel,
Distributed, and Network-Based Processing (PDP[1]) 2019, Pavia, Italy. A poster version of this work
received Best Poster Award in ICDCN 2019 [2].
⋆⋆This manuscript covers the exhaustive related work, detailed proposed mechanism with algorithms, opti-
mizations on the size of the block graph, rigorous correctness proof, and additional experimental evaluations
with state-of-the-art.
∗∗∗Author sequence follows lexical order of last names.
Email address: cs17mtech11014@iith.ac.in, sweta@cs.technion.ac.il,
sathya_p@cse.iith.ac.in, cs18mtech01002@iith.ac.in,
archit@cs.technion.ac.il (Parwat Singh Anjana†, Sweta Kumari‡, Sathya Peri†, Sachin Rathor†,
and Archit Somani‡)
Preprint submitted to Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing February 18, 2021
arXiv:2102.04875v2  [cs.DC]  17 Feb 2021
=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
1. Introduction
It is commonly believed that blockchain is a revolutionary technology for doing
business over the Internet. Blockchain is a decentralized, distributed database or ledger
of records that store the information in cryptographically linked blocks. Cryptocurren-
cies such as Bitcoin [3] and Ethereum [4] were the ﬁrst to popularize the blockchain
technology. Blockchains are now considered for automating and securely storing user
records such as healthcare, ﬁnancial services, real estate, etc. Blockchain network con-
sists of multiple peers (or nodes) where peers do not necessarily trust each other. Each
node maintains a copy of the distributed ledger. Clients, users of the blockchain, send
requests or transactions to the nodes of the blockchain called as miners. The miners
collect multiple transactions from the clients and form a block. Miners then propose
these blocks to be added to the blockchain.
The transactions sent by clients to miners are part of a larger code called as smart
contracts that provide several complex services such as managing the system state,
ensuring rules, or credentials checking of the parties involved [5]. Smart contracts
are like a ‘class’ in programming languages that encapsulate data and methods which
operate on the data. The data represents the state of the smart contract (as well as
the blockchain) and the methods (or functions) are the transactions that possibly can
change contract state. Ethereum uses Solidity [6] while Hyperledger supports language
such as Java, Golang, Node.js, etc.
Motivation for Concurrent Execution of Smart Contracts: Dickerson et al. [5]
observed that smart contract transactions are executed in two different contexts in
Ethereum blockchain. First, executed by miners while forming a block– a miner se-
lects a sequence of client requests (transactions), executes the smart contract code of
these transactions in sequence, transforming the state of the associated contract in this
process. The miner then stores the sequence of transactions, the resulting ﬁnal state of
the contracts, and the previous block hash in the block. After creating the block, the
miner proposes it to be added to the blockchain through the consensus protocol. The
other peers in the system, referred to as validators in this context, validate the block
2
=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
proposed by the miner. They re-execute the smart contract transactions in the block
serially to verify the block’s ﬁnal states. If the ﬁnal states match, then the block is
accepted as valid, and the miner who appended this block is rewarded. Otherwise, the
block is discarded. Thus the transactions are executed by every peer in the system. It
has been observed that the validation runs several times more than the miner code [5].
This design of smart contract execution is not efﬁcient as it does not allow any
concurrency. In today’s world of multi-core systems, the serial execution does not uti-
lize all the cores, resulting in lower throughput. This limitation is not speciﬁc only
to Ethereum blockchain but also applies to other popular blockchains as well. Higher
throughput means more transaction execution per unit time, which clearly will be de-
sired by both miners and validators.
However, the concurrent execution of smart contract transactions is not straightfor-
ward. Because various transactions could consist of conﬂicting access to the shared
data objects. Two contract transactions are said to be in conﬂict if both of them access
a shared data object, and at least one performs a write operation. Arbitrary execution
of these smart contract transactions by the miners might result in the data-races lead-
ing to the inconsistent ﬁnal state of the blockchain. Unfortunately, it is impossible
to statically identify conﬂicting contract transactions since contracts are developed in
Turing-complete languages. The common solution for correct execution of concurrent
transactions is to ensure that the execution is serializable [7]. A usual correctness-
criterion in databases, serializability ensure that the concurrent execution is equivalent
to some serial execution of the same transactions. Thus miners must ensure that their
execution is serializable [5] or one of its variants as described later.
The concurrent execution of the smart contract transactions of a block by the valida-
tors, although highly desirable, can further complicate the situation. Suppose a miner
ensures that the concurrent execution of the transactions in a block is serializable. Later
a validator re-executes the same transactions concurrently. However, during the con-
current execution, the validator may execute two conﬂicting transactions in an order
different from the miner. Thus the serialization order of the miner is different from the
validator. These can result in the validator obtaining a ﬁnal state different from what
was obtained by the miner. Consequently, the validator may incorrectly reject the block
3
=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
(a) Concurrent transactions (c) Equivalent execution by validator(b) Equivalent execution by miner
C1
F S IS
0x 20
F S IS
0x 10
w(x, 10)
w(x, 20)
w(x, 10)T1
C1
w(x, 20) w(x, 20) C2
w(x, 10)T1
T2
T1
C2 T2
C2
C1
T2
Figure 1: (a) consists of two concurrent conﬂicting transactions T1 and T2 working on same
shared data-objects x which are part of a block. (b) represents the miner’s concurrent execution
with an equivalent serial schedule as T1, T2 and ﬁnal state (or FS) as 20 from the initial state
(or IS) 0. Whereas (c) shows the concurrent execution by a validator with an equivalent serial
schedule as T2, T1, and the ﬁnal state as 10 from IS 0, which is different from the ﬁnal state
proposed by the miner. Such a situation leads to the rejection of the valid block by the validator,
which is undesirable.
although it is valid as depicted in Figure 1.
Dickerson et al. [5] identiﬁed these issues and proposed a solution for concurrent
execution by both miners and validators. The miner concurrently executes block trans-
actions using abstract locks and inverse logs to generate a serializable execution. Then,
to enable correct concurrent execution by the validators, the miners provide a happen-
before graph in the block. The happen-before graph is a direct acyclic graph over all
the transactions of the block. If there is a path from a transactionTi toTj then the val-
idator has to executeTi beforeTj. Transactions with no path between them can execute
concurrently. The validator using the happen-before graph in the block executes all the
transactions concurrently using the fork-join approach. This methodology ensures that
the ﬁnal state of the blockchain generated by the miners and the validators are the same
for a valid block and hence not rejected by the validators. The presence of tools such
as a happen-before graph in the block provides a greater enhancement to validators to
consider such blocks. It helps them execute quickly through parallelization instead of a
block that does not have any parallelization tools. This fascinates the miners to provide
such tools in the block for concurrent execution by the validators.
Proposed Solution Approach - Optimistic Concurrent Execution and Lock-Free
Graph: Dickerson et al. [5] developed a solution to the problem of concurrent miner
and validators using locks and inverse logs. It is well known that locks are pessimistic
4
=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
in nature. So, in this paper, we propose a novel and efﬁcient framework for concurrent
miner using optimistic Software Transactional Memory Systems (STMs). STMs are
suitable for the concurrent executions of transactions without worrying about consis-
tency issues.
The requirement of the miner, is to concurrently execute the smart contract trans-
actions correctly and output a graph capturing dependencies among the transactions
of the block such as happen-before graph. We denote this graph as block graph (or
BG). The miner uses an optimistic STM system to execute the smart contract transac-
tions concurrently in the proposed solution. Since STMs also work with transactions,
we differentiate between smart contract transactions and STM transactions. The STM
transactions invoked by an STM system is a piece of code that it tries to execute atom-
ically even in the presence of other concurrent STM transactions. If the STM system
is not able to execute it atomically, then the STM transaction is aborted.
The expectation of a smart contract transaction is that it will be executed serially.
Thus, when it is executed in a concurrent setting, it is expected to execute atomically
(or serialized). To differentiate between smart contract transaction from STM transac-
tion, we denote smart contract transaction as atomic-unit (AU) and STM transaction as
transaction in the rest of the document. Thus the miner uses the STM system to invoke
a transaction for each AU. In case the transaction gets aborted, then the STM repeat-
edly invokes new transactions for the same AU until a transaction invocation eventually
commits.
A popular correctness guarantee provided by STM systems is opacity [8] which
is stronger than serializability. Opacity like serializability requires that the concurrent
execution, including the aborted transactions, be equivalent to some serial execution.
This ensures that even aborted transaction reads consistent value until the point of abort.
As a result, a miner using an STM does not encounter any undesirable side-effects such
as crash failures, inﬁnite loops, divide by zero, etc. STMs provide this guarantee by
executing optimistically and support atomic (opaque) reads, writes on transactional
objects (or t-objects).
Due to simplicity, we have chosen two timestamp based STMs in our design: (1)
Basic Timestamp Ordering or BTO STM [9, Chap 4], maintains only one version for
5
=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
each t-object. (2) Multi-Version Timestamp Ordering or MVTO STM [10], maintains
multiple versions corresponding to each t-object which further reduces the number of
aborts and improves the throughput.
The advantage of using timestamp-based STM is that the equivalent serial history
is ordered based on the transactions’ timestamps. Thus using the timestamps, the miner
can generate the BG of the AUs. We call it as STM approach. Dickerson et al. [5],
developed the BG in a serial manner. Saraph and Herlihy [11] proposed a simple bin-
based two-phase speculative approach to execute AUs concurrently in the Ethereum
blockchain without storing the BG in the block. We analyzed that the bin-based ap-
proach reduces the size of the block but fails to exploits the concurrency. We name
this approach as Speculative Bin (Spec Bin) approach. So, in our proposed approach,
we combined spec bin-based approach [11] with the STM approach [1] for the optimal
storage of BG in a block and exploit the concurrency. Concurrent miner generates an
efﬁcient BG in concurrent and lock-free [12] manner.
The concurrent miner applies the STM approach to generate two bins while ex-
ecuting AUs concurrently, a concurrent bin and a sequential bin. AUs which can be
executed concurrently (without any conﬂicts) are stored in the concurrent bin. While
the AUs having conﬂicts are stored in a sequential bin in the BG form to record the
conﬂicts. This combined technique reduces the size of the BG than [1] while storing
the graph of only sequential bin AUs instead of all AUs.
We propose a concurrent validator that creates multiple threads. Each of these
threads parses the concurrent bin followed by efﬁcient BG provided by the concurrent
miner and re-execute the AUs for validation. The BG consists of only dependent AUs.
Each validator thread claims a node that does not have any dependency, i.e., a node
without any incoming edges by marking it. After that, it executes the corresponding
AUs deterministically. Since the threads execute only those nodes with no incoming
edges, the concurrently executing AUs will not have any conﬂicts. Hence the validator
threads need not have to worry about synchronization issues. We denote this approach
adopted by the validator as a decentralized approach as the multiple threads are work-
ing on BG concurrently in the absence of a master thread.
The approach adopted by Dickerson et al. [5], works onfork-join in which a master
6
=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
thread allocates different tasks to slave threads. The master thread identiﬁes AUs that
do not have any incoming dependencies in the BG and allocates them to different slave
threads. In this paper, we compare the performance of both these approaches with the
serial validator.
The signiﬁcant contributions of the paper are as follows:
• Introduce a novel way to execute the AUs by concurrent miner using optimistic
STMs (Section 4). We implement the concurrent miner using BTO and MVTO
STM, but it is generic to any STM protocol.
• We propose a lock-free and concurrent graph library to generate the efﬁcient BG
which contains only dependent atomic-units and optimize the size of the block
than [1] (see Section 4).
• We propose concurrent validator that re-executes the AUs deterministically and
efﬁciently with the help of concurrent bin followed by efﬁcient BG given by
concurrent miner (see Section 4).
• To make our proposed approach storage optimal and efﬁcient, we have optimized
the BG size (see Section 4).
• We rigorously prove that the concurrent miner and validator satisﬁes correctness
criterion as opacity (see Section 5).
• We achieve 4.49× and 5.21× average speedups for optimized concurrent miner
using BTO and MVTO STM protocol, respectively. Optimized concurrent BTO
and MVTO decentralized validator outperform average 7.68× and 8.60× than
serial validator, respectively (Section 6).
Section 2 presents the related work on concurrent execution of smart contract trans-
actions. While, Section 3 includes the notions related to STMs and execution model
used in the paper. The conclusion with several future directions is presented in Sec-
tion 7.
2. Related Work
This section presents the related work on concurrent execution on blockchains in
line with the proposed approach.
7
=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
Table 1: Related Work Summary
Miner Approach Locks Require Block Graph Validator Approach Blockchain Type
Dickerson et al. [5] Pessimistic ScalaSTM Yes Yes Fork-join Permissionless
Zhang and Zhang [17] - - Read, Write Set MVTO Approach Permissionless
Anjana et al. [1] Optimistic RWSTM No Yes Decentralized Permissionless
Amiri et al. [18] Static Analysis - Yes - Permissioned
Saraph and Herlihy [11] Bin-based Approach Yes No Bin-based Permissionless
Anjana et al. [19] Optimistic ObjectSTM No Yes Decentralized Permissionless
Proposed Approach Bin+Optimistic RWSTM No No (if no dependencies) / Yes Decentralized Permissionless
The interpretation of Blockchain was introduced by Satoshi Nakamoto in 2009 as
Bitcoin [3] to perform electronic transactions without third party interference. Nick
Szabo [13] introduced smart contracts in 1997, adopted by Ethereum blockchain in
2015 to expand blockchain functionalities beyond ﬁnancial transactions (cryptocurren-
cies). A smart contract is an interface to reduce the computational transaction cost
and provides secure relationships on distributed networks. There exist several papers
[14, 15, 16] in the literature that works on the safety and security concern of smart
contracts, which is out of the scope of this paper. We mainly focus on the concurrent
execution of AUs. A concise summary of closely related works is given in Table 1.
Dickerson et al. [5] introduced concurrent executions of AUs in the blockchain.
They observed that miners and validators could execute AUs simultaneously to exploit
concurrency offered by ubiquitous multi-core processors. The approach of this work is
given in Section 1.
Zhang and Zhang [17] proposed a concurrent miner using a pessimistic concur-
rency control protocol, which delays the read until the corresponding writes to commit
and ensures a conﬂict-serializable schedule. The proposed concurrent validator uses
MVTO protocol to execute transactions concurrently using the write sets provided by
the concurrent miner in the block.
Anjana et al. [1] proposed optimistic Read-Write STM (RWSTM) using BTO and
MVTO based protocols. The timestamp-based protocols are used to identify the con-
ﬂicts between AUs. The miner executes the AUs using RWSTM and constructs the BG
dynamically at the runtime using the timestamps. Later, a concurrent Decentralized
Validator (Dec-Validator) executes the AUs in the block in a decentralized manner.
The Decentralized Validator is efﬁcient than the Fork-Join Validator since there is no
8
=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
master validator thread to allocate the AUs to the slave validator threads to execute.
Instead, all the validator threads identify the source vertex (a vertex with indegree 0) in
the BG independently and claim the source node to execute the corresponding AU.
Amiri et al. [18] proposed ParBlockchain– an approach for concurrent execution
of transactions in the block for permissioned blockchain. They developed an OXII
paradigm1 to support distributed applications. The OXII paradigm orders the block
transactions based on the agreement between the orderer nodes using static analysis
or speculative execution to obtain the read-set and write-set of each transaction, then
generates the BG and constructs the block. The executors from respective applications
(similar to the executors in fabric channels) execute the transactions concurrently and
then validate them by re-executing the transaction. So, the nodes of the ParBlockchain
execute the transactions in two phases using the OXII paradigm. A block with BG
based on the transaction conﬂicts is generated in the ﬁrst phase, known as the ordering
phase. The second phase, known as the execution phase, executes the block transac-
tions concurrently using the BG appended with block.
Saraph and Herlihy [11] proposed a simple bin-based two-phase speculative ap-
proach to execute AUs concurrently in the Ethereum blockchain. They empirically val-
idated the possible beneﬁt of their approach by evaluating it on historical transactions
from the Ethereum. In the ﬁrst phase, the miner uses locks and executes AUs in a block
concurrently by rolling back those AUs that lead to the conﬂict(s). All the aborted AUs
are then kept into a sequential bin and executed in the second phase sequentially. The
miner gives concurrent and sequential bin hints in the block to the validator to execute
the same schedule as executed by the miner. The validator executes the concurrent bin
AUs concurrently while executes the sequential bin AUs sequentially. Instead of BG,
giving hints about bins takes less space. However, it does not harness the maximum
concurrency available within the block.
Later, Anjana et al. [19] proposed an approach that uses optimistic single-version
and multi-version Object-based STMs (OSTMs)for the concurrent execution of AUs by
1A paradigm in which transactions are ﬁrst ordered for concurrent execution then executed by both miners
and validators [18].
9
=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
the miner. The OSTMs operate at a higher (object) level rather than page (read-write)
level and constructs the BG. However, the BG is still quite signiﬁcantly large in the
existing approaches and needs higher bandwidth to broadcast such a large block for
validation.
In contrast, we propose an efﬁcient framework for concurrent execution of the AUs
using optimistic STMs. We combine the beneﬁts of both Spec Bin-based and STM-
based approaches to optimize the storage aspects (efﬁcient storage optimal BG), which
further improves the performance. Due to its optimistic nature, the updates made by
a transaction will be visible to shared memory only on commit; hence, rollback is
not required. Our approach ensures correctness criteria as opacity [8]. The proposed
approach gives better speedup over state-of-the-art and serial execution of AUs.
3. System Model
In this section, we will present the notions related to STMs and the execution model
used in the proposed approach.
Following [20, 21], we assume a system of n processes/threads, p1,...,p n that
access a collection of transactional objects or t-objects via atomic transactions. Each
transaction has a unique identiﬁer. Within a transaction, processes can perform trans-
actional operations or methods:
• STM.begin()– begins a transaction.
• STM.write(x,v ) (or w(x,v ))– updates a t-object x with value v in its local
memory.
• STM.read(x,v ) (orr(x,v ))– tries to readx and returns value asv.
• STM.tryC()– tries to commit the transaction and returnscommit (orC) if suc-
ceeds.
• STM.tryA()– aborts the transaction and returnsA.
Operations STM.read() and STM.tryC() may returnA. TransactionTi starts with
the ﬁrst operation and completes when any of its operations return A orC. For a
10
=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
transactionTk, we denote all thet-objects accessed by its read operations and write op-
erations asrsetk andwsetk, respectively. We denote all the operations of a transaction
Tk asevts(Tk) orevtsk.
History: A history is a sequence ofevents, i.e., a sequence of invocations and responses
of transactional operations. The collection of events is denoted as evts(H). For sim-
plicity, we consider sequential histories, i.e., the invocation of each transactional oper-
ation is immediately followed by a matching response. Therefore, we treat each trans-
actional operation as one atomic event and let <H denote the total order on the trans-
actional operations incurred byH. We identify a historyH as tuple⟨evts(H),< H⟩.
Further, we consider well-formed histories, i.e., no transaction of a process begins
before the previous transaction invocation has completed (eithercommits oraborts).
We also assume that every history has an initialcommitted transactionT0 that initializes
all the t-objects with value 0. The set of transactions that appear in H is denoted
by txns(H). The set of committed (resp., aborted) transactions in H is denoted by
committed(H) (resp., aborted(H)). The set of incomplete or live transactions in H is
denoted byH.incomp =H.live = (txns(H)− committed(H)− aborted(H)).
We construct acomplete history ofH, denoted asH, by insertingSTM.tryA k(A)
immediately after the last event of every transactionTk∈H.live. But forSTM.tryC i
of transactionTi, if it released the lock on ﬁrstt-object successfully that means updates
made byTi is consistent so,Ti will immediately return commit.
Transaction Real-Time and Conﬂict order: For two transactions Tk,T m∈ txns(H),
we say thatTk precedesTm in the real-time order ofH, denoted asTk≺RT
H Tm, ifTk
is complete inH and the last event ofTk precedes the ﬁrst event ofTm inH. If neither
Tk≺RT
H Tm norTm≺RT
H Tk, then Tk andTm overlap inH. We say that a history
is serial (or t-sequential) if all the transactions are ordered by real-time order. We say
thatTk,T m are in conﬂict, denoted asTk≺Conf
H Tm, if
(1)STM.tryC k()<H STM.tryC m() andwset(Tk)∩wset(Tm)⁄=∅;
(2)STM.tryC k()<H rm(x,v ),x∈wset(Tk) andv⁄=A;
(3)rk(x,v )<H STM.tryC m(),x∈wset(Tm) andv⁄=A.
Thus, it can be seen that the conﬂict order is deﬁned only on operations that have
11
=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
successfully executed. We denote the corresponding operations as conﬂicting.
Valid and Legal histories: A successful read rk(x,v ) (i.e.,v⁄=A) in a history H is
said to be valid if there exist a transaction Tj that wrote v tox and committed before
rk(x,v ). HistoryH is valid if all its successful read operations are valid.
We deﬁnerk(x,v )’slastWrite as the latest commit eventCi precedingrk(x,v ) in
H such thatx∈wseti (Ti can also beT0). A successful read operation rk(x,v ) (i.e.,
v⁄=A), is said to be legal if the transaction containing rk’s lastWrite also writes v
ontox. The history H is legal if all its successful read operations are legal. From the
deﬁnitions we get that ifH is legal then it is also valid.
Notions of Equivalence: Two historiesH andH′ are equivalent if they have the same
set of events. We say two histories H,H′ are multi-version view equivalent [9, Chap.
5] or MVVE if
(1)H,H′ are valid histories and
(2)H is equivalent toH′.
Two historiesH,H′ are view equivalent [9, Chap. 3] or VE if
(1)H,H′ are legal histories and
(2)H is equivalent toH′. By restricting to legal histories, view equivalence does
not use multi-versions.
Two historiesH,H′ are conﬂict equivalent [9, Chap. 3] or CE if
(1)H,H′ are legal histories and
(2) conﬂict inH,H′ are the same, i.e.,conf (H) = conf (H′).
Conﬂict equivalence like view equivalence does not use multi-versions and restricts
itself to legal histories.
VSR, MVSR, and CSR: A historyH is said to VSR (or View Serializable) [9, Chap.
3], if there exist a serial historyS such thatS is view equivalent toH. But this notion
considers only single-version corresponding to each t-object.
MVSR (or Multi-Version View Serializable) maintains multiple version correspond-
ing to each t-object. A history H is said to MVSR [9, Chap. 5], if there exist a serial
historyS such thatS is multi-version view equivalent toH. It can be proved that ver-
ifying the membership of VSR as well as MVSR in databases is NP-Complete [7]. To
12
=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
circumvent this issue, researchers in databases have identiﬁed an efﬁcient sub-class of
VSR, called CSR based on the notion of conﬂicts. The membership of CSR can be
veriﬁed in polynomial time using conﬂict graph characterization.
A historyH is said to CSR (or Conﬂict Serializable) [9, Chap. 3], if there exist a
serial historyS such thatS is conﬂict equivalent toH.
Serializability and Opacity: Serializability [7] is a commonly used criterion in databases.
But it is not suitable for STMs as it does not consider the correctness of aborted trans-
actions as shown by Guerraoui and Kapalka [8]. Opacity, on the other hand, considers
the correctness of aborted transactions as well.
A historyH is said to be opaque [8, 20] if it is valid and there exists a t-sequential legal
historyS such that
(1)S is equivalent to complete historyH and
(2)S respects≺RT
H , i.e.,≺RT
H ⊂≺RT
S .
By requiring S being equivalent to H, opacity treats all the incomplete transac-
tions as aborted. Similar to view-serializability, verifying the membership of opacity
is NP-Complete [7]. To address this issue, researchers have proposed another popular
correctness-criterion co-opacity whose membership is polynomial time veriﬁable.
Co-opacity: A history H is said to be co-opaque [21] if it is valid and there exists a
t-sequential legal historyS such that
(1)S is equivalent to complete historyH and
(2)S respects≺RT
H , i.e.,≺RT
H ⊂≺RT
S .
(3) S preserves conﬂicts (i.e.≺Conf
H ⊆≺Conf
S ).
Linearizability: A historyH is linearizable [22] if
(1) The invocation and response events can be reordered to get a valid sequential
history.
(2) The generated sequential history satisﬁes the object’s sequential speciﬁcation.
(3) If a response event precedes an invocation event in the original history, then this
should be preserved in the sequential reordering.
Lock Freedom: An algorithm is said to be lock-free [12] if the program threads are
13
=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
(a) Underlying representation of Block Graph (b) Block Graph
−∞
−∞
−∞
−∞
5
ts vref eN ext
+∞
+∞
+∞
10
ts vref eN ext
+∞
10
ts vref eN ext
T0 T5
T10
AU eN ext
vN ext0 0
ts inCnt
1
AU eN ext
vN ext5 2
ts inCnt
AU eN ext
vN ext10 2
ts inCnt
1
3
Edge List (or eList)
Vertex List (or vList)
Figure 2: Pictorial representation of Block Graph
run for a sufﬁciently long time, at least one of the threads makes progress. It allows
individual threads to starve but guarantees system-wide throughput.
4. Proposed Mechanism
This section presents the methods of lock-free concurrent block graph library fol-
lowed by concurrent execution of AUs by miner and validator.
4.1. Lock-free Concurrent Block Graph
Data Structure of Lock-free Concurrent Block Graph: We use the adjacency list
to maintain the block graph BG(V , E), as shown in Figure 2 (a). Where V is a set of
vertices (or vNodes) which are stored in the vertex list (or vList) in increasing order
of timestamp between two sentinel node vHead (-∞) and vTail (+∞). Each vertex
node (or vNode) contains⟨ts = i,AU id = id, inCnt = 0, vNext = nil, eNext = nil⟩.
Wherei is a unique timestamp (orts) of transactionsTi.AUid is theid of a atomic-unit
executed by transactionTi. To maintain the indegree count of eachvNode, we initialize
inCnt as 0. vNext and eNext initialize asnil.
14
=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
While E is a set of edges which maintains all conﬂicts of vNode in the edge list
(or eList), as shown in Figure 2 (a). eList stores eNodes (or conﬂicting transaction
nodes, say Tj) in increasing order of timestamp between two sentinel nodes eHead
(-∞) and eTail (+∞). Edge node (or eNode) contains⟨ts = j, vref, eNext =nil⟩. Here,
j is a unique timestamp (or ts) of committed transaction Tj having a conﬂict with
Ti andts(Ti) is less than ts(Tj). We add conﬂicting edges from lower timestamp to
higher timestamp transactions to maintain the acyclicity in the BG i.e., conﬂict edge
is from Ti to Tj in the BG. Figure 2 (b) illustrates this using three transactions with
timestamp 0, 5, and 10, which maintain the acyclicity while adding an edge from lower
to higher timestamp. To make it search efﬁcient, vertex node reference (or vref) keeps
the reference of its own vertex which is present in thevList and eNext initializes asnil.
The block graph (BG) generated by the concurrent miner helps to execute the
validator concurrently and deterministically through lock-free graph library methods.
Lock-free graph library consists of ﬁve methods as follows:addVert(), addEdge(),
searchLocal(), searchGlobal() and decInCount().
Lock-free Graph Library Methods Accessed by Concurrent Miner: The concur-
rent miner uses addVert() and addEdge() methods of lock-free graph library to
build a BG. When concurrent miner wants to add a node in the BG, it ﬁrst calls the
addVert() method. The addVert() method identiﬁes the correct location of that
node (or vNode) in the vList at Line 16. If vNode is not part of vList, it creates the node
and adds it into vList at Line 19 in a lock-free manner using atomic compare and swap
(CAS) operation. Otherwise, vNode is already present in vList at Line 24.
Algorithm 1 BG(vNode, STM): It generates a BG for all the atomic-unit nodes.
1: procedure BG(vNode, STM)
2: /*Get the confList of transaction Ti from STM*/
3: clist← STM.getConfList (vNode.tsi);
4: /*Ti conﬂicts with Tj and Tj existes in conﬂict list
of Ti*/
5: for all (tsj∈ clist) do
6: addVert (tsj);
7: addVert (vNode.tsi);
8: if (tsj < vNode.tsi) then
9: addEdge (tsj, vNode.tsi);
10: else
11: addEdge (vNode.tsi, tsj);
12: end if
13: end for
14: end procedure
15
=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
Algorithm 2 addVert(tsi): It adds the vertex in the BG forTi.
15: procedure addVert(tsi)
16: Identify⟨vPred, vCurr⟩ of vNode of tsi in vList;
17: if (vCurr.tsi⁄= vNode.tsi) then
18: Create new Graph Node (vNode) of tsi in vList;
19: if (vPred.vNext.CAS(vCurr, vNode)) then
20: return⟨Vertex added⟩;
21: end if
22: goto Line 16; /*Start with the vPred to identify
the new⟨vPred, vCurr⟩*/
23: else
24: return⟨Vertex already present⟩;
25: end if
26: end procedure
Algorithm 3 addEdge(fromNode, toNode): It adds an edge fromfromNode to toNode.
27: procedure addEdge(fromNode, toNode)
28: Identify the⟨ePred, eCurr⟩ of toNode in eList of
the fromNode vertex in BG;
29: if (eCurr.tsi⁄= toNode.tsi) then
30: Create new Graph Node (or eNode) in eList;
31: if (ePred.eNext.CAS(eCurr, eNode)) then
32: Increment the inCnt atomically of
eNode.vref in vList;
33: return⟨Edge added⟩;
34: end if
35: goto Line 28; /*Start with the ePred to identify
the new⟨ePred, eCurr⟩*/
36: else
37: return⟨Edge already present⟩;
38: end if
39: end procedure
Algorithm 4 searchLocal(cacheVer,AUid): Thread searches source node incache-
List.
40: procedure searchLocal(cacheV er)
41: if (cacheVer.inCnt.CAS(0, -1)) then
42: nCount← nCount.get&Inc();
43: AUid← cacheVer.AUid;
44: return⟨cacheVer⟩;
45: else
46: return⟨nil⟩;
47: end if
48: end procedure
Algorithm 5 searchGlobal(BG,AUid): Thread searches the source node in BG.
49: procedure searchGlobal(BG, AUid)
50: vNode← BG.vHead;
51: while (vNode.vNext⁄= BG.vTail) do
52: if (vNode.inCnt.CAS(0, -1)) then
53: nCount← nCount.get&Inc();
54: AUid← vNode.AUid;
55: return⟨vNode⟩;
56: end if
57: vNode← vNode.vNext;
58: end while
59: return⟨nil⟩;
60: end procedure
16
=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
Algorithm 6 decInCount(remNode): Decrement the inCnt of each conﬂicting node.
61: procedure decInCount(remNode)
62: while (remNode.eNext⁄= remNode.eTail) do
63: Decrement the inCnt atomically of
remNode.vref in the vList;
64: if (remNode.vref.inCnt == 0) then
65: Add remNode. verf node into cacheList of
thread local log, thLog;
66: end if
67: remNode← remNode.eNext.verf ;
68: return⟨remNode⟩;
69: end while
70: return⟨nil⟩;
71: end procedure
Algorithm 7 executeCode(curAU): Execute the current atomic-units.
72: procedure executeCode(curAU )
73: while (curAU.steps.hasNext()) do /*Assume that
curAU is a list of steps*/
74: curStep = currAU.steps.next();
75: switch (curStep) do
76: case read(x):
77: Read data-object x from a shared memory;
78: case write(x, v):
79: Write x in shared memory with value v;
80: case default:
81: /*Neither read or write in shared memory*/;
82: execute curStep;
83: end while
84: return⟨void⟩
85: end procedure
After successfully adding vNode in the BG, concurrent miner calls addEdge()
method to add the conﬂicting node (or eNode) corresponding to vNode in the eList.
First, the addEdge() method identiﬁes the correct location of eNode in the eList of
corresponding vNode at Line 28. If eNode is not part of eList, it creates and adds
it into eList of vNode at Line 31 in a lock-free manner using atomic CAS operation.
After successful addition of eNode in the eList of vNode, it increments the inCnt of
eNode.vref (to maintain indegree count) node, which is present in thevList at Line 32.
Lock-free Graph Library Methods Accessed by Concurrent Validator: Concur-
rent validator uses searchLocal(), searchGlobal() and decInCount()
methods of lock-free graph library. First, concurrent validator thread callssearchLocal()
method to identify the source node (having indegree (orinCnt) 0) in its local cacheList
(or thread-local memory). If any source node exists in the local cacheList with inCnt
0, then to claim that node, it sets the inCnt ﬁeld to -1 at Line 41 atomically.
If the source node does not exist in the local cacheList, then the concurrent val-
idator thread calls searchGlobal() method to identify the source node in the BG
at Line 52. If a source node exists in the BG, it sets inCnt to -1 atomically to claim
17
=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
Algorithm 8 Concurrent Miner(auList[], STM): Concurrentlym threads are executing
atomic-units from auList[] (or list of atomic-units) with the help of STM.
86: procedure Concurrent Miner(auList[], STM)
87: /*Add all AUs in the Concurrent Bin (concBin[])*/
88: concBin[]← auList[];
89: /*curAU is the current AU taken from auList[] */
90: curAU← curInd.get&Inc(auList[]);
91: /*Execute until all AUs successfully completed*/
92: while (curAU < size of(auList[])) do
93: Ti← STM.begin();
94: while (curAU.steps.hasNext()) do
95: curStep = currAU.steps.next();
96: switch (curStep) do
97: case read(x):
98: v← STM.readi(x);
99: if (v == abort) then
100: goto Line 93;
101: end if
102: case write(x, v):
103: STM.writei(x, v);
104: case default:
105: /*Neither read or write in memory*/
106: execute curStep;
107: end while
108: /*Try to commit the current transaction Ti and
update the confList[i]*/
109: v← STM.tryCi();
110: if (v == abort) then
111: goto Line 93;
112: end if
113: if (confList[i] == nil) then
114: curAU doesn’t have dependencies with other
AUs. So, no need to create a node in BG.
115: else
116: create a nodes with respective dependencies
from curAU to all AUs∈ confList[i] in BG
and remove curAU and AUs fromconcBin[]
117: Create vNode with⟨i, AUid, 0, nil, nil⟩ as
a vertex of Block Graph;
118: BG(vNode, STM);
119: end if
120: curAU← curInd.get&Inc(auList[]);
121: end while
122: end procedure
that node and calls the decInCount() method to decreases the inCnt of all con-
ﬂicting nodes atomically, which are present in the eList of corresponding source node
at Line 63. While decrementing inCnts, it checks if any conﬂicting node became a
source node, then it adds that node into its local cacheList to optimize the search time
of identifying the next source node at Line 65.
4.2. Concurrent Miner
Smart contracts in blockchain are executed in two different contexts. First, the
miner proposes a new block. Second, multiple validators re-execute to verify and val-
idate the block proposed by the miner. In this subsection, we describe how miner
executes the smart contracts concurrently.
A concurrent miner gets the set of transactions from the blockchain network. Each
transaction is associated with a method (atomic-unit) of smart contracts. To run the
smart contracts concurrently, we have faced the challenge of identifying the conﬂicting
18
=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
transactions at run-time because smart contract languages are Turing-complete. Two
transactionsconﬂict if they access a shared data-objects and at least one of them per-
form write operation. In concurrent miner, conﬂicts are identiﬁed at run-time using
an efﬁcient framework provided by the optimistic software transactional memory sys-
tem (STMs). STMs access the shared data-objects called as t-objects. Each shared
t-object is initialized to an initial state (or IS). The atomic-units may modify the IS
to some other valid state. Eventually, it reaches the ﬁnal state (or FS) at the end of
block-creation. As shown in Algorithm 8, the concurrent miner ﬁrst copies all the AUs
in the concurrent bin at Line 88. Each transactionTi gets the unique timestampi from
STM.begin() at Line 93. Then transaction Ti executes the atomic-unit of smart
contracts. Atomic-unit consists of multiple steps such as reads andwrites on shared
t-objects asx. Internally, theseread andwrite steps are handled by theSTM.read()
and STM.write(), respectively. At Line 97, if current atomic-unit step (or curStep)
is read(x) then it calls the STM.read(x). Internally, STM.read() identify the
shared t-objectx from transactional memory (or TM) and validate it. If validation is
successful, it gets the value as v at Line 98 and executes the next step of atomic-unit;
otherwise, re-executed the atomic-unit ifaborted at Line 99.
If curStep is write(x) at Line 102 then it calls the STM.write(x). Internally,
STM.write() stores the information of shared t-object x into local log (or txlog)
in write-set (or wseti) for transaction Ti. We use an optimistic approach in which
the transaction’s effect will reﬂect onto the TM after the successful STM.tryC(). If
validation is successful for all thewseti of transactionTi in STM.tryC(), i.e., all the
changes made by the Ti are consistent, then it updates the TM; otherwise, re-execute
the atomic-unit if aborted at Line 110. After successful validation of STM.tryC(),
it also maintains the conﬂicting transaction ofTi into the conﬂict list in TM.
If the conﬂict list is nil (Line 113), there is no need to create a node in the BG.
Otherwise, create the node with respective dependencies in the BG and remove those
AUs from the concurrent bin (Line 116). To maintain the BG, it calls addVert()
and addEdge() methods of the lock-free graph library. The details of addVert()
and addEdge() methods are explained in SubSection 4.1. Once the transactions
successfully executed the atomic-units and done with BG construction, the concurrent
19
=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
Algorithm 9 Concurrent Validator(auList[], BG): ConcurrentlyV threads are execut-
ing AUs with the help of concurrent bin followed by the BG given by the miner.
123: procedure Concurrent Validator(auList[], BG)
124: /*Execute until all AUs successfully completed*/
125: /*Phase-1: Concurrent Bin AUs execution.*/
126: while (concCount < size of(concBin[])) do
127: count← concCount.get&Inc(auList[]);
128: AUid← concBin[count];
129: executeCode(AUid);
130: end while
131: /*Phase-2: Block Graph AUs execution.*/
132: while (nCount < size of(auList[])) do
133: while (cacheList.hasNext()) do
134: cacheVer← cacheList.next();
135: cacheVertex← searchLocal(cacheVer,
AUid);
136: executeCode(AUid);
137: while (cacheVertex)do
138: cacheVertex← decInCount(cacheVertex);
139: end while
140: Remove the current node (or cacheVertex)
from local cacheList;
141: end while
142: vexNode← searchGlobal(BG, AUid);
143: executeCode(AUid);
144: while (verNode) do
145: verNode← decInCount(verNode);
146: end while
147: end while
148: end procedure
miner computes the hash of the previous block. Eventually,concurrent miner proposes
a block consisting of a set of transactions, BG, the ﬁnal state of each shared t-objects,
previous block hash, and sends it to all other network peers to validate.
4.3. Concurrent Validator
The concurrent validator validates the block proposed by the concurrent miner. It
executes the block transactions concurrently and deterministically in two phases us-
ing a concurrent bin and BG given by the concurrent miner. In the ﬁrst phase, val-
idator threads execute the independent AUs of concurrent bin concurrently (Line 126
to Line 130). Then in the second phase, it uses BG to executes the dependent AUs
by executeCode() method at Line 136 and Line 143 using searchLocal(),
searchGlobal() and decInCount() methods of lock-free graph library at Line 135,
Line 142 and (Line 138, Line 145), respectively. BG consists of dependency among
the conﬂicting transactions that restrict them to execute serially. The functionality of
lock-free graph library methods is explained earlier in SubSection 4.1.
After the successful execution of all the atomic-units, the concurrent validator
compares its computed ﬁnal state with the ﬁnal states given by the concurrent miner.
If the ﬁnal state matches for all the shared data-objects, then the block proposed by
20
=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
the concurrent miner is valid. Finally, based on consensus between network peers, the
block is appended to the blockchain, and the respective concurrent miner is rewarded.
4.4. Optimizations
To make the proposed approach storage optimal and efﬁcient, this subsection ex-
plains the key change performed on top of the solution proposed by Anjana et al. [1].
In Anjana et al. [1], there is a corresponding vertex node in the block graph (BG) for
every AUs in the block. We observed that all the AUs in the block need not have depen-
dencies. Adding a vertex node for such AUs takes additional space in the block. This
is the ﬁrst optimization our approach provides. In our approach, only the dependent
AUs have a vertex in the BG, while the independent AUs are stored in the concurrent
bin, which does not need any additional space. During the execution, a concurrent
miner thread does not add a vertex to the BG if it identiﬁes that the currently executed
AU does not depend on the AUs already executed. However, suppose any other miner
thread detects any dependence during the remaining AUs execution. That thread will
add the dependent AUs vertices in the BG.
For example, let say we have n AUs in a block and a vertex node size is ≈ m kb
to store in the BG, then it needs a total ofn∗m kb of vertex node space for Anjana et
al. [1]. Suppose from n AUs, only n
2 have the dependencies, then a total of n
2∗m kb
vertex space needed in the BG. In the proposed approach, the space optimization can
be 100% in the best case when all the AUs are independent. While in the worst case,
it can be 0% when all the AUs are dependent. However, only a few AUs in a block
have dependencies. Space-optimized BG helps to improve the network bandwidth and
reduces network congestion.
Further, our approach combines the beneﬁt of both Speculative Bin-based approach
[11] and STM-based approach [1] to yield maximum speedup that can be achieved by
validators to execute AUs. So, another optimization is at the validators side; due to
the concurrent bin in the block, the time taken to traverse the BG will decrease; hence,
speedup increases. The concurrent validators execution is modiﬁed and divided into
two phases. First, it concurrently executes AUs of the concurrent bin using multiple
threads, since AUs in the concurrent bin will be independent. While in the second
21
=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
phase, dependent AUs are stored in the BG and concurrently executed using BG to
preserve the transaction execution order as executed by the miner.
5. Correctness
The correctness of concurrent BG, miner, and validator is described in this section.
We ﬁrst list the linearization points (LPs) of the block graph library methods as follows:
1. addVert(vNode): (vPred.vNext.CAS(vCurr, vNode)) in Line 19 is the LP point
of addVert() method if vNode is not exist in the BG. If vNode is exist in the
BG then (vCurr.tsi⁄= vNode.tsi) in Line 17 is the LP point.
2. addEdge(fromNode, toNode): (ePred.eNext.CAS(eCurr, eNode)) in Line 31 is
the LP point of addEdge() method if eNode is not exist in the BG. If eNode is
exist in the BG then (eCurr.tsi⁄= toNode.tsi) in Line 29 is the LP point.
3. searchLocal(cacheVer,AUid): (cacheVer. inCnt.CAS(0, -1)) in Line 41 is
the LP point of searchLocal() method.
4. searchGlobal(BG, AUid): ( vNode.inCnt.CAS(0, -1)) in Line 52 is the LP
point of searchGlobal() method.
5. decInCount(remNode): Line 63 is the LP point ofdecInCount() method.
Theorem 1. Any historyHm generated by the concurrent miner using the BTO proto-
col satisﬁes co-opacity.
Proof: Concurrent miner executes AUs concurrently using BTO protocol and generate
a concurrent history Hm. The underlying BTO protocol ensures the correctness of
concurrent execution of Hm. The BTO protocol [9, Chap 4] proves that any history
generated by it satisﬁes co-opacity [23]. So, implicitly BTO proves that the historyHm
generated by concurrent miner using BTO satisﬁes co-opacity.
Theorem 2. Any historyHm generated by the concurrent miner using the MVTO pro-
tocol satisﬁes opacity.
22
=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
Proof: Concurrent miner executes AUs concurrently using MVTO protocol and gener-
ate a concurrent history Hm. The underlying MVTO protocol ensures the correctness
of concurrent execution ofHm. The MVTO protocol [10] proves that any history gen-
erated by it satisﬁes opacity [8]. So, implicitly MVTO proves that the history Hm
generated by concurrent miner using MVTO satisﬁes opacity.
Theorem 3. All the dependencies between the conﬂicting nodes are captured in BG.
Proof: Dependencies between the conﬂicting nodes are captured in the BG using LP
points of lock-free graph library methods deﬁned above. Concurrent miner constructs
the lock-free BG using BTO and MVTO protocol in SubSection 4.1. BG consists of
vertices and edges, where each committed AU act as a vertex and edges (or depen-
dencies) represents the conﬂicts of the respective STM protocol (BTO and MVTO).
As we know, STM protocols BTO [9, Chap 4] and MVTO [10] used in this paper for
the concurrent execution are correct, i.e., these protocols captures all the dependen-
cies correctly between the conﬂicting nodes. Hence, all the dependencies between the
conﬂicting nodes are captured in the BG.
Theorem 4. A historyHm generated by the concurrent miner using BTO protocol and
a historyHv generated by a concurrent validator are view equivalent.
Proof: A concurrent miner executes the AUs ofHm concurrently using BTO protocol,
captures the dependencies of Hm in the BG, and proposes a block B. Then it broad-
casts the block B along with BG to concurrent validators to verify the block B. The
concurrent validator applies the topological sort on the BG and obtained an equivalent
serial scheduleHv. Since the BG constructed from Hm considers all the conﬂicts and
Hv obtained from the topological sort on the BG. So, Hv is equivalent toHm. Simi-
larly,Hv also follows the read from relation ofHm. Hence,Hv is legal. SinceHv and
Hm are equivalent to each other, andHv is legal. So,Hm andHv are view equivalent.
Theorem 5. A history Hm generated by the concurrent miner using MVTO protocol
and a history Hv generated by a concurrent validator are multi-version view equiva-
lent.
23
=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
Proof: Similar to the proof of Theorem 4, the concurrent miner executes the AUs of
Hm concurrently using MVTO protocol, captures the dependencies in the BG, pro-
poses a block B, and broadcasts it to the concurrent validators to verify it. MVTO
maintains multiple-version corresponding to each shared object. Later, concurrent val-
idator obtainedHv by applying topological sort on the BG provided by the concurrent
miner. Since,Hv obtained from topological sort on the BG so,Hv is equivalent toHm.
Similarly, the BG maintains the read from relations ofHm. So, from MVTO protocol
if Tj reads a value for shared object k say rj(k) from Ti in Hm then Ti committed
beforerj(k) inHv. Therefore, Hv is valid. Since Hv andHm are equivalent to each
other andHv is valid. So,Hm andHv are multi-version view equivalent.
6. Experimental Evaluation
We aim to increase the efﬁciency of the miners and validators by employing con-
current execution of AUs while optimizing the size of the BG appended by the miner
in the block. To assess the efﬁciency of the proposed approach, we performed simula-
tion on the series of benchmark experiments with Ethereum [4] smart contracts from
Solidity documentation [6]. Since multi-threading is not supported by the Ethereum
Virtual Machine (EVM) [4, 5], we converted the Ethereum smart contracts into C++.
We evaluated the proposed approach with the state-of-the-art approaches [1, 5, 11] over
baseline serial execution on three different workloads by varying the number of AUs,
the number of threads, and the number of shared objects. The benchmark experiments
are conservative and consist of one or fewer smart contracts AUs in a block, which
leads to a higher degree of conﬂicts than actual conﬂicts in practice where a block con-
sists of AUs from different contracts ( ≈ 1.5 million deployed smart contracts [24]).
Due to fewer conﬂicts in the actual blockchain, the proposed approach is expected to
provide greater concurrency. We structure our experimental evaluation to answer the
following questions:
1. How much speedup is achieved with varying AUs by concurrent miners and
validators when ﬁxing the number of threads and shared objects? As conﬂicts
increase with increasing AUs, we expect a decrease in speedup.
24
=== PDF PAGE 25 ===
2. How does speedup change when increasing the number of threads with a ﬁxed
number of AUs and shared objects? We expect to see the speedup increase with
increasing threads conﬁned by logical threads available within the system.
3. How does speedup shift over different shared objects with ﬁxed AUs and threads?
We expect an increase in speedup due to conﬂict deterioration with objects in-
crease. So, we anticipate concurrent miners and validators overweigh serial min-
ers and validators with fewer conﬂicts.
6.1. Contract Selection and Benchmarking
This section provides a comprehensive overview of benchmark contracts coin, bal-
lot, and simple auction from Solidity Documentation [6] selected as real-world exam-
ples for evaluating the proposed approach. The AUs in a block for the coin, ballot,
and auction benchmark operate on the same contract, i.e., consists of the transaction
calls of one or more methods of the same contract. In practice, a block consists of the
AUs from different contracts; hence we designed another benchmark contract called
mix contract consisting of contract transactions from coin, ballot, and auction in equal
proportion in a block. The benchmark contracts and respective methods are as follows:
Coin Contract: The coin contract is the simplest form of sub-currency. The users
involved in the contract have accounts, and accounts are shared objects. It implements
methods such as mint(), transfer()/send(), and getbalance() which
represent the AUs in a block. The contract deployer uses the mint() method to
give initial coins/balance to each account with the same ﬁxed amount. We initialized
the coin contract’s initial state with a ﬁxed number of accounts on all benchmarks and
workloads. Using transfer(), users can transfer coin from one account to other
account. The getbalance() is used to check the coins in a user account. For the
experiments a block consists of 75% getbalance(), and 25% transfer() calls.
A conﬂict between AUs occurs if they access a common object (account), and at least
one of them performs a transfer() operation.
Ballot Contract: The ballot contract is an electronic voting contract in which voters
and proposals are shared objects. The vote(), delegate(), and winningproposal()
are the methods of ballot contract. The voters use thevote() method to cast their vote
25
=== PDF PAGE 26 ===
to a speciﬁc proposal. Alternatively, a voter can delegate their vote to other voter using
delegate() method. A voter can cast or delegate their vote only once. At the end
of the ballot, the winningproposal() is used to compute the winner. We initial-
ized the ballot contract’s initial state with a ﬁxed number of proposals and voters for
benchmarking on different workloads for experiments. The proposal to voter ratio is
ﬁxed to 5% to 95% of the total shared objects. A block consists of 90% vote(), and
a 10% delegate() method calls followed by awinningproposal() call for the
experiments. The AUs will conﬂict if they operate on the same object. So, if two voters
vote() for the same proposal simultaneously, then they will conﬂict.
Simple Auction Contract: It is an online auction contract in which bidders bid for
a commodity online. In the end, the amount from the maximum bidder is granted to
the owner of the commodity. The bidders, maximum bid, and maximum bidder are the
shared object. In our experiments, the initial contract state is a ﬁxed number of bidders
with a ﬁxed initial account balance and a ﬁxed period of the auction to end. In the
beginning, the maximum bidder and bid are set to null (the base price and the owner
can be set accordingly). The bidder uses the contract method bid() to bid for the
commodity with their bid amount—the max bid amount and the bidder changes when
a bid is higher than the current maximum. A bidder uses the withdraw() method to
move the balance of their previous bid into their account. The bidder uses bidEnd()
method to know if the auction is over. Finally, when the auction is ended, the maximum
bidder (winner) amount is transferred to the commodity owner, and commodity own-
ership is transferred to the max bidder. For benchmarking in our experiments a block
consist of 8% bid(), 90% withdraw(), and 2% bidEnd() method calls. The
max bidder and max bid are the conﬂict points whenever a new bid with the current
highest amount occurs.
Mix Contract: In this contract, we combine the AUs in equal proportion from the
above three contracts (coin, ballot, and auction). Therefore, our experiment block con-
sists of an equal number of corresponding contract transactions with the same initial
state as initialized in the above contracts.
26
=== PDF PAGE 27 ===
6.2. Experimental Setup and Workloads
We ran our experiments on a large-scale 2-socket Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2690
V4 @ 2.60 GHz with a total of 56 hyper-threads (14 cores per socket and two threads
per core) with 32 GB of RAM running Ubuntu 18.04.
In our experiments, we have noticed that speedup varies from contract to contract
on different workloads. The speedup on various contracts is not for comparison be-
tween contracts. Instead, it demonstrates the proposed approach efﬁciency on several
use-cases in the blockchain. We have considered the following three workloads for
performance evaluation:
1. In workload 1 (W1), a block consists of AUs varies from 50 to 400, ﬁxed 50
threads, and shared objects of 2K. The AUs per block in Ethereum blockchain
is on an average of 100, while the actual could be more than 200 [5], however a
theoretical maximum of≈ 400 [25] after a recent increase in the gas limit. Over
time, the number of AUs per block is increasing. In practice, one block can have
less AUs than the theoretical cap, which depends on the gas limit of the block
and the gas price of the transactions. We will see that in a block, the percentage
of data conﬂicts increase with increasing AUs. The conﬂict within a block is
described by different AUs accessing a common shared object, and at least one
of them performs an update. We have found that the data conﬂict varies from
contract to contract and has a varied effect on speedup.
2. In workload 2 (W2), we varied the number of threads from 10 to 60 while ﬁxed
the AUs to 300 and shared objects to 2K. Our experiment system consists of a
maximum of 56 hardware threads, so we experimented with a maximum of 60
threads. We observed that the speedup of the proposed approach increases with
an increasing number of threads limited by logical threads.
3. The number of AUs and threads in workload 3 (W3) are 50 and 300, respectively,
although the shared objects range from 1K to 6K. This workload is used with
each contract to measure the impact of the number of participants involved. Data
conﬂicts are expected to decrease with an increasing number of shared objects;
27
=== PDF PAGE 28 ===
however, the search time may increases. The speedup depends on the execution
of the contract; but, it increases with an increasing number of shared objects.
6.3. Analysis
In our experiments, blocks of AUs were generated for each benchmark contract on
three workloads: W1 (varying AUs), W2 (varying threads), and W3 (varying shared
objects). Then, concurrent miners and validators execute the blocks concurrently.
The corresponding blocks serial execution is considered as a baseline to compute the
speedup of proposed concurrent miners and validators. The running time is collected
for 15 iterations (times) with 10 blocks per iteration, and 10 validators validate each
block. The ﬁrst block of each iteration is left as a warm-up run, and a total of 150
blocks are created for each reading. So, each block execution time is averaged by 9.
Further, the total time taken by all iterations is averaged by the number of iteration for
each reading; the Eqn(1) is used to compute a reading time.
αt =
n∑
i=1
m−1∑
b=1
βt
n∗ (m− 1) (1)
Where αt is an average time for a reading, n is the number of iterations, m is the
number of blocks, andβt is block execution time.
In all plots, ﬁgure (a), (b), and (c) correspond to workload W1, W2, and W3, re-
spectively. Figure 3 to Figure 6 show the speedup achieved by proposed and state-of-
the-art concurrent miners over serial miners for all benchmarks and workloads. Fig-
ure 7 to Figure 10 show the speedup achieved by proposed and state-of-the-art concur-
rent decentralized validators over serial validators for all benchmarks and workloads.
Figure 11 to Figure 14 show speedup achieved by proposed and state-of-the-art concur-
rent fork-join validators over serial validators. Figure 15 to Figure 18 show the average
number of edges (dependencies) and vertices (AUs) in the block graph for respective
contracts on all workloads. While Figure 19 to Figure 22 show the percentage of addi-
tional space required to store the block graph in Ethereum block. A similar observation
has been found [26] for the fork-join validator, the average number of dependencies,
and space requirement on other contracts.
28
=== PDF PAGE 29 ===
We observed that speedup for all benchmark contracts follows the roughly same
pattern. In the read-intensive benchmarks (coin and mix), speedup likely to increase on
all the workloads, while in the write-intensive benchmark (ballot and auction), speedup
drop downs on high contention. We also observed that there might not be much speedup
for concurrent miners with fewer AUs (less than 100) in the block, conceivably due to
multi-threading overhead. However, the speedup for concurrent validators generally
increases across all the benchmarks and workloads. Fork-join concurrent validators on
W2 is an exception in which speedup drops down with an increase in the number of
threads since fork-join follows a master-slave approach where a master thread becomes
a performance bottleneck. We also observed that the concurrent validators achieve a
higher speedup than the concurrent miners. Because the concurrent miner executes
the AUs non-deterministically, ﬁnds conﬂicting AUs, creates concurrent bin and an
efﬁcient BG for the validators to execute the AUs deterministically.
Our experiment results also show the BG statics and additional space required to
store BG in a block of Ethereum blockchain, which shows the space overhead. We
compare our proposed approach with the existing speculative bin (Spec Bin) based
approach [11], the fork-join approach (FJ-Validator) [5] and the approach proposed
in [1] (we call it default/Def approach). The proposed approach combines the beneﬁt
of both bin-based and the STM approaches to get maximum beneﬁt for concurrent
miners and validators. The proposed approach 2 produces an optimal BG, reduces the
space overhead, and outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches.
Figure 3(a) to Figure 6(a) show the speedup for concurrent miner on W1. As shown
in Figure 3(a) and Figure 6(a) for read-intensive contracts such as in coin and mix
contract, the speedup increases with an increase in AUs, respectively. While in write-
intensive contracts such as ballot and auction contract the speedup does not increase
with an increase in AUs; instead, it may drop down if AUs increases, as shown in
Figure 4(a) and Figure 5(a), respectively. This is because contention increases with an
increase in AUs.
2In the ﬁgures, legend items in bold.
29
=== PDF PAGE 30 ===
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
100 200 300 400 500 600
(a) Concurrent Miner on W1
Coin Contract
Speedup over Serial Miner
Number of AUs
 
Def-BTO Miner
Opt-BTO Miner
Def-MVTO Miner
Opt-MVTO Miner
Spec Bin Miner
Serial Miner
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
10 20 30 40 50 60
(b) Concurrent Miner on W2
Coin Contract
Number of Threads
 
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
1k 2k 3k 4k 5k 6k
(c) Concurrent Miner on W3
Coin Contract
Number of Shared Objects
 
Figure 3: Concurrent miner speedup over serial miner for coin contract.
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
100 200 300 400 500 600
(a) Concurrent Miner on W1
Ballot Contract
Speedup over Serial Miner
Number of AUs
 
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
10 20 30 40 50 60
(b) Concurrent Miner on W2
Ballot Contract
Number of Threads
 
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
1k 2k 3k 4k 5k 6k
(c) Concurrent Miner on W3
Ballot Contract
Number of Shared Objects
 
Figure 4: Concurrent miner speedup over serial miner for ballot contract.
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
100 200 300 400 500 600
(a) Concurrent Miner on W1
Auction Contract
Speedup over Serial Miner
Number of AUs
 
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
10 20 30 40 50 60
(b) Concurrent Miner on W2
Auction Contract
Number of Threads
 
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
1k 2k 3k 4k 5k 6k
(c) Concurrent Miner on W3
Auction Contract
Number of Shared Objects
 
Figure 5: Concurrent miner speedup over serial miner for auction contract.
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
100 200 300 400 500 600
(a) Concurrent Miner on W1
Mix Contract
Speedup over Serial Miner
Number of AUs
 
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
10 20 30 40 50 60
(b) Concurrent Miner on W2
Mix Contract
Number of Threads
 
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
1k 2k 3k 4k 5k 6k
(c) Concurrent Miner on W3
Mix Contract
Number of Shared Objects
 
Figure 6: Concurrent miner speedup over serial miner for mix contract.
30
=== PDF PAGE 31 ===
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
100 200 300 400 500 600
(a) Concurrent Dec-Validator on W1
Coin Contract
Speedup over Serial Validator
Number of AUs
 
Def-BTO Dec-Validator
Opt-BTO Dec-Validator
Def-MVTO Dec-Validator
Opt-MVTO Dec-Validator
Spec Bin Dec-Validator
Serial Validator
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
10 20 30 40 50 60
(b) Concurrent Dec-Validator on W2
Coin Contract
Number of Threads
 
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
1k 2k 3k 4k 5k 6k
(c) Concurrent Dec-Validator on W3
Coin Contract
Number of Shared Objects
 
Figure 7: Concurrent decentralized validator speedup over serial validator for coin contract.
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
100 200 300 400 500 600
(a) Concurrent Dec-Validator on W1
Ballot Contract
Speedup over Serial Validator
Number of AUs
 
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
10 20 30 40 50 60
(b) Concurrent Dec-Validator on W2
Ballot Contract
Number of Threads
 
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
1k 2k 3k 4k 5k 6k
(c) Concurrent Dec-Validator on W3
Ballot Contract
Number of Shared Objects
 
Figure 8: Concurrent decentralized validator speedup over serial validator for ballot contract.
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
100 200 300 400 500 600
(a) Concurrent Dec-Validator on W1
Auction Contract
Speedup over Serial Validator
Number of AUs
 
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
10 20 30 40 50 60
(b) Concurrent Dec-Validator on W2
Auction Contract
Number of Threads
 
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
1k 2k 3k 4k 5k 6k
(c) Concurrent Dec-Validator on W3
Auction Contract
Number of Shared Objects
 
Figure 9: Concurrent decentralized validator speedup over serial validator for auction contract.
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
100 200 300 400 500 600
(a) Concurrent Dec-Validator on W1
Mix Contract
Speedup over Serial Validator
Number of AUs
 
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
10 20 30 40 50 60
(b) Concurrent Dec-Validator on W2
Mix Contract
Number of Threads
 
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
1k 2k 3k 4k 5k 6k
(c) Concurrent Dec-Validator on W3
Mix Contract
Number of Shared Objects
 
Figure 10: Concurrent decentralized validator speedup over serial validator for mix contract.
31
=== PDF PAGE 32 ===
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
100 200 300 400 500 600
(a) Concurrent FJ-Validator on W1
Coin Contract
Speedup over Serial Validator
Number of AUs
 
Def-BTO FJ-Validator
Opt-BTO FJ-Validator
Def MVTO FJ-Validator
Opt-MVTO FJ-Validator
Serial Validator
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
10 20 30 40 50 60
(b) Concurrent FJ-Validator on W2
Coin Contract
Number of Threads
 
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
1k 2k 3k 4k 5k 6k
(c) Concurrent FJ-Validator on W3
Coin Contract
Number of Shared Objects
 
Figure 11: Concurrent fork join validator speedup over serial validator for coin contract.
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
100 200 300 400 500 600
(a) Concurrent FJ-Validator on W1
Ballot Contract
Speedup over Serial Validator
Number of AUs
 
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
10 20 30 40 50 60
(b) Concurrent FJ-Validator on W2
Ballot Contract
Number of Threads
 
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
1k 2k 3k 4k 5k 6k
(c) Concurrent FJ-Validator on W3
Ballot Contract
Number of Shared Objects
 
Figure 12: Concurrent fork join validator speedup over serial validator for ballot contract.
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
100 200 300 400 500 600
(a) Concurrent FJ-Validator on W1
Auction Contract
Speedup over Serial Validator
Number of AUs
 
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
10 20 30 40 50 60
(b) Concurrent FJ-Validator on W2
Auction Contract
Number of Threads
 
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
1k 2k 3k 4k 5k 6k
(c) Concurrent FJ-Validator on W3
Auction Contract
Number of Shared Objects
 
Figure 13: Concurrent fork join validator speedup over serial validator for auction contract.
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
100 200 300 400 500 600
(a) Concurrent FJ-Validator on W1
Mix Contract
Speedup over Serial Validator
Number of AUs
 
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
10 20 30 40 50 60
(b) Concurrent FJ-Validator on W2
Mix Contract
Number of Threads
 
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
1k 2k 3k 4k 5k 6k
(c) Concurrent FJ-Validator on W3
Mix Contract
Number of Shared Objects
 
Figure 14: Concurrent fork join validator speedup over serial validator for mix contract.
32
=== PDF PAGE 33 ===
Figure 7(a) through Figure 14(a) show the speedup for concurrent validators over
serial validators on W1. The speedup for concurrent validators (decentralized and fork-
join) increases with an increase in AUs. Figure 7(a) to Figure 10(a) demonstrate the
speedup achieved by decentralized validator. It can be observed that for read-intensive
benchmarks, the optimized MVTO decentralized validator (Opt-MVTO Dec-Validator)
outperforms other validators. In contrast, in write-intensive benchmarks, the default
MVTO decentralized validator (Def-MVTO Dec-Validator) achieves better speedup
over other validators. Due to the overhead of multithreading for the concurrent bin
with very fewer AUs. We observed that with increasing AUs in the blocks, the conﬂicts
also increase. As a result, the number of transactions in the concurrent bin decreases.
The speculative bin decentralized validator (Spec Bin Dec-Validator) speedup is quite
less over concurrent STM Dec-Validators. Because STM miner precisely determines
the dependencies between the AUs of the block and harness the maximum concurrency
than the bin-based miner. However, suppose the block consists of the AUs with very
few dependencies. In that case, Spec Bin Dec-Validator is expected to outperform other
validators, as shown in the Figure 7(a).
Figure 11(a) to Figure 14(a) show the speedup for fork-join validators on W1 for
all the benchmarks. We can observe that the proposed optimized MVTO fork-join val-
idator (Opt-MVTO FJ-Validator) outperforms other validators due to lower overheads
at the fork-join master validator thread to allocate independent AUs to slave valida-
tor threads. We noticed that decentralized concurrent validators speedup is quite high
over fork-join concurrent validators because there is no bottleneck in this approach for
allocating the AUs. All threads in the decentralized approach work independently. It
can also be observed that with fewer AUs in several benchmarks, the speedup by fork-
join validators drops to the point where it is less than the serial validators due to the
overhead of thread creation dominate the speedup achieved, as shown in Figure 12(a),
Figure 13(a) and Figure 14(a).
In W1, concurrent miners achieve a minimum of ≈ 2× and maximum up to 10×
speedup over serial miners across the contracts. The concurrent STM decentralized
validators achieve speedup minimum≈ 4× and maximum up to ≈ 14× while Spec
Bin Dec-Validator ranges from≈ 3× to≈ 9× over serial miner across the contracts.
33
=== PDF PAGE 34 ===
The fork-join concurrent validators achieve a maximum speedup of ≈ 5× over the
serial validator.
Figure 3(b) to Figure 14(b) show the speedup on W2. The speedup increases with
an increase in the number of threads. However, it is limited by the maximum number
of logical threads in the experimental system. Thus, a slight drop in the speedup can be
seen from 50 threads to 60 threads because the experimental system has a maximum
of 56 logical threads. The reset of the concurrent miner observations is similar to the
workload W1 based on read-intensive and write-intensive benchmarks.
As shown in the Figure 7(b) to Figure 10(b), the concurrent decentralized valida-
tors speedup increase with an increase in threads. While as shown in Figure 11(b) to
Figure 14(b), the concurrent fork-join validators speedup drops down with an increase
in threads. The reason for this drop in the speedup is that the master validator thread
in the fork-join approach becomes a bottleneck. The decentralized validator’s observa-
tion shows that for the read-intensive benchmark, the Opt-MVTO Dec-validator out-
performs other validators. While in the write-intensive benchmark, the Def-MVTO
Dec-validator outperforms other validators, as shown in Figure 8(b). However, in the
fork-join validator approach, the proposed Opt-MVTO FJ-validator outperforms all
other validators due to the optimization beneﬁt of bin based approach inclusion.
In W2, concurrent miners achieve a minimum of ≈ 1.5× and achieves maximum
up to≈ 8× speedup over serial miners across the contracts. The concurrent STM
decentralized validators achieve speedup minimum≈ 4× and maximum up to≈ 10×
while Spec Bin Dec-Validator ranges from≈ 3× to≈ 7× over serial miner across the
contracts. The fork-join concurrent validators achieve a maximum speedup of≈ 4.5×
over the serial validator.
The plots in Figure 3(c) to Figure 14(c) show the concurrent miners and validators
speedup on W3. As shared objects increase, the concurrent miner speedup increases
because conﬂict decreases due to less contention. Additionally, when contention is
very low, more AUs are added in the concurrent bin. However, it also depends on the
contract. If the contract is a write-intensive, fewer AUs are added in the concurrent bin.
While more AUs added in the concurrent bin for read-intensive contracts.
As shown in Figure 3(c) and Figure 6(c), the speculative bin miners surpass STM
34
=== PDF PAGE 35 ===
miners due to read-intensive contracts. While in Figure 4(c) and Figure 5(c), the Def-
MVTO Miner outperform other miners as shared objects increase. In contrast, Def-
BTO Miner performs better over other miners when AUs are fewer because search time
in write-intensive contracts to determine respective versions is much more in MVTO
miner than BTO miner. Although, all concurrent miners performers better than the
serial miner. In W3, concurrent miners start at around 1.3× and archives maximum up
to 14× speedup over serial miners across all the contracts.
The speedup by validators (decentralized and fork-join) increases with shared ob-
jects. In Figure 7(c), Figure 9(c), and Figure 10(c), proposed Opt-STM Dec-Validator
perform better over other validators. However, for write-intensive contracts, the num-
ber of AUs in the concurrent bin would be less. Therefore, the speedup by Def-STM
Dec-Validators is greater than Opt-STM Dec-Validators, as shown in Figure 8(c). The
Spec Bin Dec-Validator speedup is quite less over concurrent STM Dec-Validators be-
cause STM miner precisely determines the dependencies between the AUs than the bin
based miner.
In fork-join validators, proposed Opt-STM FJ-Validators outperform over all other
FJ-Validators, as shown in Figure 11(c) to Figure 14(c) because of less contention at
the master validator thread in the proposed approach to allocate independent AUs to
slave validator threads. We noticed that decentralized concurrent validators speedup
is relatively high over fork-join concurrent validators with similar reasoning explained
above. In W3, concurrent STM decentralized validators start at around 4× and achieve
a maximum up to 14× speedup while Spec Bin Dec-Validator ranges from 1× to 14×
speedup over serial miner across the contracts. The fork-join concurrent validators
achieve a maximum speedup of 7× over the serial validator. The concurrent validators
beneﬁted from the work of the concurrent miners and outperformed serial validators.
Figure 15 to Figure 18 show the average number of edges (dependencies as his-
tograms) and vertices (AUs as line chart) in the BG for mix contract on all the work-
loads3. The average number of edges (dependencies) in the BG for both Default and
3We used histograms and line chart to differentiate vertices and edges to avoid confusion in comparing
the edges and vertices.
35
=== PDF PAGE 36 ===
 4
 16
 64
 256
 1024
 4096
100 200 300 400 500 600
(a) STM Miner on W1
Coin Contract
Average Number of
Edges and Vertices in BG
Number of AUs
 
 4
 16
 64
 256
 1024
 4096
10 20 30 40 50 60
(b) STM Miner on W2
Coin Contract
Number of Threads
 
 4
 16
 64
 256
 1024
 4096
1k 2k 3k 4k 5k 6k
(c) STM Miner on W3
Coin Contract
Number of Shared Objects
 (Opt-)BTO Edges
(Opt-)MVTO Edges
Opt-BTO Vertices
Opt-MVTO Vertices
BTO Vertices
MVTO Vertices
Figure 15: Average number of edges (dependencies) and vertices (AUs) in block graph for coin contract.
 4
 16
 64
 256
 1024
 4096
100 200 300 400 500 600
(a) STM Miner on W1
Ballot Contract
Average Number of
Edges and Vertices in BG
Number of AUs
 
 4
 16
 64
 256
 1024
 4096
10 20 30 40 50 60
(b) STM Miner on W2
Ballot Contract
Number of Threads
 
 4
 16
 64
 256
 1024
 4096
1k 2k 3k 4k 5k 6k
(c) STM Miner on W3
Ballot Contract
Number of Shared Objects
 
Figure 16: Average number of edges (dependencies) and vertices (AUs) in block graph for ballot contract.
 4
 16
 64
 256
 1024
 4096
100 200 300 400 500 600
(a) STM Miner on W1
Auction Contract
Average Number of
Edges and Vertices in BG
Number of AUs
 
 4
 16
 64
 256
 1024
 4096
10 20 30 40 50 60
(b) STM Miner on W2
Auction Contract
Number of Threads
 
 4
 16
 64
 256
 1024
 4096
1k 2k 3k 4k 5k 6k
(c) STM Miner on W3
Auction Contract
Number of Shared Objects
 
Figure 17: Average number of edges (dependencies) and vertices (AUs) in block graph for auction contract.
 4
 16
 64
 256
 1024
 4096
100 200 300 400 500 600
(a) STM Miner on W1
Mix Contract
Average Number of
Edges and Vertices in BG
Number of AUs
 
 4
 16
 64
 256
 1024
 4096
10 20 30 40 50 60
(b) STM Miner on W2
Mix Contract
Number of Threads
 
 4
 16
 64
 256
 1024
 4096
1k 2k 3k 4k 5k 6k
(c) STM Miner on W3
Mix Contract
Number of Shared Objects
 
Figure 18: Average number of edges (dependencies) and vertices (AUs) in block graph for mix contract.
36
=== PDF PAGE 37 ===
Optimized approach for respective STM protocol remains the same; hence only two
histograms are plotted for simplicity. As shown in the Figure 15(a) to Figure 18(a)
with increasing AUs in W1, the BG edges and vertices also increase. It shows that the
contention increases with increasing AUs in the blocks. As shown in the Figure 15(b)
to Figure 18(b) in W2, the number of vertices and edges does not change much. How-
ever, in the W3, the number of vertices and edges decreases, as shown in Figure 15(c)
to Figure 18(c).
In our proposed approach, the BG consists of vertices respective to only conﬂict-
ing AUs, and non-conﬂicting AUs are stored in the concurrent bin. While in Anjana
et al. [1] approach, all the AUs had corresponding vertex nodes in the BG shown in
Figure 15 to Figure 18. So, in W1, it will be 100 vertices in the BG if block consists of
100 AUs and 200 if block consists of 200 AUs. In W2 and W3, it will be 300 vertices.
Having only conﬂicting AUs vertices in BG saves much space because each vertex
node takes 28-byte storage space.
The average block size in the Bitcoin and Ethereum blockchain is≈ 1200 KB [27]
and≈ 20.98 KB [28], respectively measured for the interval of Jan 1 st, 2019 to Dec
31th, 2020. Further, the block size keeps on increasing, and so the number of trans-
actions in the block. The average number of transactions in the Ethereum block is
≈ 100 [28]. Therefore, in the Ethereum blockchain, each transaction size is an average
≈ 0.2 KB (≈ 200 bytes). We computed the block size based on these simple calcu-
lations when AUs vary in the block for W1. The Eqn(2) is used to compute the block
size (B) for the experiments.
B = 200∗NAU s (2)
Where,B is block size in bytes,NAU s number of AUs in block, and200 is the average
size of an AU in bytes.
To store the block graph BG(V,E ) in the block, we used adjacency list. In the
BG, a vertex nodeVs takes 28 bytes storage, which consists of 3 integer variables and
2 pointers. While an edge nodeEs needs a total of20 bytes storage. The Eqn(3) is used
to compute the size of BG (β bytes). While Eqn(4) is used to compute the additional
space (βp percentage) needed to store BG in the block.
37
=== PDF PAGE 38 ===
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
 32
 64
 128
100 200 300 400 500 600
(a) STM Miner on W1
Coin Contract
% of increase in the Block
Size due to BG in Ethereum
Number of AUs
 
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
 32
 64
 128
10 20 30 40 50 60
(b) STM Miner on W2
Coin Contract
Number of Threads
 
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
 32
 64
 128
1k 2k 3k 4k 5k 6k
(c) STM Miner on W3
Coin Contract
Number of Shared Objects
 Def-BTO BG Def-MVTO BG  Opt-BTO BG  Opt-MVTO BG
Figure 19: Percentage of additional space to store block graph in Ethereum block for coin contract.
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
 32
 64
 128
100 200 300 400 500 600
(a) STM Miner on W1
Ballot Contract
% of increase in the Block
Size due to BG in Ethereum
Number of AUs
 
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
 32
 64
 128
10 20 30 40 50 60
(b) STM Miner on W2
Ballot Contract
Number of Threads
 
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
 32
 64
 128
1k 2k 3k 4k 5k 6k
(c) STM Miner on W3
Ballot Contract
Number of Shared Objects
 
Figure 20: Percentage of additional space to store block graph in Ethereum block for ballot contract.
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
 32
 64
 128
100 200 300 400 500 600
(a) STM Miner on W1
Auction Contract
% of increase in the Block
Size due to BG in Ethereum
Number of AUs
 
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
 32
 64
 128
10 20 30 40 50 60
(b) STM Miner on W2
Auction Contract
Number of Threads
 
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
 32
 64
 128
1k 2k 3k 4k 5k 6k
(c) STM Miner on W3
Auction Contract
Number of Shared Objects
 
Figure 21: Percentage of additional space to store block graph in Ethereum block for auction contract.
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
 32
 64
 128
100 200 300 400 500 600
(a) STM Miner on W1
Mix Contract
% of increase in the Block
Size due to BG in Ethereum
Number of AUs
 
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
 32
 64
 128
10 20 30 40 50 60
(b) STM Miner on W2
Mix Contract
Number of Threads
 
 0.5
 1
 2
 4
 8
 16
 32
 64
 128
1k 2k 3k 4k 5k 6k
(c) STM Miner on W3
Mix Contract
Number of Shared Objects
 
Figure 22: Percentage of additional space to store block graph in Ethereum block for mix contract.
38
=== PDF PAGE 39 ===
β = (Vs∗NAU s) + (Es∗Me) (3)
Where,β is size of BG in bytes,Vs is size of a vertex node ofBG in bytes,Es is size
(in bytes) of a edge node ofBG, andMe is number of edges inBG.
βp = (β∗ 100)/B (4)
The plots in Figure 19 to Figure 22 demonstrate the average percentage of addi-
tional storage space required to store BG in the Ethereum block on all benchmarks and
workloads. We can observe that the space requirement also increases with an increase
in the number of dependencies and vertices in BG. However, the space requirement of
our proposed approach is smaller than the existing default approach. As shown in the
Figure 16, the dependencies and vertices are highest in the ballot contract compared to
other contracts, so the space requirement is also high, as shown in Figure 20. This is
because the ballot is a write-intensive benchmark. It can be seen that the space require-
ments of BG by Opt-BTO BG and Opt-MVTO BG is smaller than Def-BTO BG and
Def-MVTO BG miner, respectively.
The proposed approach signiﬁcantly reduces the BG size for mix contract as shown
in Figure 22 across all the workloads. Which clearly shows the storage efﬁciency of
the proposed approach. The storage advantage comes from using a bin-based approach
combined with the STM approach, where concurrent bin information needs to be added
into the block, which requires less space than having a corresponding vertex in BG
for each AUs of the block. So, we combine the advantages of both the approaches
(STM and Bin) to get maximum speedup with storage optimal BG. The average space
required for BG in % w.r.t. block size is34.55%, 31.69%, 17.24%, and 13.79% by Def-
BTO. Def- MVTO, Opt-BTO, and Opt-MVTO approach, respectively. The proposed
Opt-BTO and Opt-MVTO BG are 2× (or 200.47%) and 2.30× (or 229.80%) efﬁcient
over Def-BTO and Def-MVTO BG, respectively. With an average speedup of 4.49×
and 5.21× for Opt-BTO, Opt-MVTO concurrent miner over serial, respectively. The
Opt-BTO and Opt-MVTO decentralized concurrent validator outperform an average of
7.68× and 8.60× than serial validator, respectively.
39
=== PDF PAGE 40 ===
7. Conclusion
To exploit the multi-core processors, we have proposed the concurrent execution
of smart contract by miners and validators, which improves the throughput. Initially,
the miner executes the smart contracts concurrently using optimistic STM protocol as
BTO. To reduce the number of aborts and further improve efﬁciency, the concurrent
miner uses MVTO protocol, which maintains multiple versions corresponding to each
data object. Concurrent miner proposes a block that consists of a set of transactions,
concurrent bin, BG, previous block hash, and the ﬁnal state of each shared data objects.
Later, the validators re-execute the same smart contract transactions concurrently and
deterministically in two-phase using concurrent bin followed by the BG given by miner,
which capture the conﬂicting relations among the transactions to verify the ﬁnal state.
Overall, the proposed Opt-BTO and Opt-MVTO BG are 2× (or 200.47%) and 2.30×
(or 229.80%) efﬁcient over Def-BTO and Def-MVTO BG, respectively. With an av-
erage speedup of 4.49× and 5.21× for Opt-BTO, Opt-MVTO concurrent miner over
serial, respectively. The Opt-BTO and Opt-MVTO decentralized concurrent validator
outperform an average of 7.68× and 8.60× than serial validator, respectively.
Acknowledgements. This project was partially supported by a research grant from
Thynkblynk Technologies Pvt. Ltd, and MEITY project number 4(20)/2019-ITEA.
References
[1] P. S. Anjana, S. Kumari, S. Peri, S. Rathor, A. Somani, An efﬁcient framework
for optimistic concurrent execution of smart contracts, in: 2019 27th Euromicro
International Conference on Parallel, Distributed and Network-Based Processing
(PDP), IEEE, 2019, pp. 83–92.
[2] P. S. Anjana, S. Kumari, S. Peri, S. Rathor, A. Somani, Entitling concurrency
to smart contracts using optimistic transactional memory, in: Proceedings of
the 20th International Conference on Distributed Computing and Networking,
ICDCN ’19, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY , USA, 2019,
p. 508.
40
=== PDF PAGE 41 ===
[3] S. Nakamoto, Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system, https://
bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf (2009).
[4] Ethereum, http://github.com/ethereum, [Acessed 26-3-2019].
[5] T. Dickerson, P. Gazzillo, M. Herlihy, E. Koskinen, Adding Concurrency to Smart
Contracts, in: Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed
Computing, PODC ’17, ACM, New York, NY , USA, 2017, pp. 303–312.
[6] Solidity Documentation, https://solidity.readthedocs.io/, [Ac-
cessed 15-09-2020].
[7] C. H. Papadimitriou, The serializability of concurrent database updates, J. ACM
26 (4) (1979) 631–653.
[8] R. Guerraoui, M. Kapalka, On the correctness of transactional memory (2008)
175–184.
[9] G. Weikum, G. V ossen, Transactional Info Systems: Theory, Algorithms, and the
Practice of Concurrency Control and Recovery, 2002.
[10] P. Kumar, S. Peri, K. Vidyasankar, A TimeStamp Based Multi-version STM Al-
gorithm, in: ICDCN, Springer, 2014, pp. 212–226.
[11] V . Saraph, M. Herlihy, An Empirical Study of Speculative Concurrency in
Ethereum Smart Contracts, in: International Conference on Blockchain Eco-
nomics, Security and Protocols (Tokenomics 2019), V ol. 71 of OASIcs, Dagstuhl,
Germany, 2020, pp. 4:1–4:15.
[12] M. Herlihy, N. Shavit, On the nature of progress, OPODIS 2011, Springer.
[13] N. Szabo, Formalizing and securing relationships on public networks, First Mon-
day 2 (9).
[14] L. Luu, J. Teutsch, R. Kulkarni, P. Saxena, Demystifying incentives in the con-
sensus computer, in: Proceedings of the 22Nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer and Communications Security, CCS ’15, ACM, New York, NY , USA,
2015, pp. 706–719.
41
=== PDF PAGE 42 ===
[15] K. Delmolino, M. Arnett, A. E. Kosba, A. Miller, E. Shi, Step by step towards
creating a safe smart contract: Lessons and insights from a cryptocurrency lab, in:
Financial Cryptography and Data Security - FC 2016 International Workshops,
BITCOIN, VOTING, and W AHC, Christ Church, Barbados, February 26, 2016.,
Springer.
[16] L. Luu, D.-H. Chu, H. Olickel, P. Saxena, A. Hobor, Making smart contracts
smarter, in: CCS ’16, ACM.
[17] A. Zhang, K. Zhang, Enabling concurrency on smart contracts using multiversion
ordering, in: Web and Big Data, Springer, Cham, 2018, pp. 425–439.
[18] M. J. Amiri, D. Agrawal, A. El Abbadi, Parblockchain: Leveraging transaction
parallelism in permissioned blockchain systems, in: 2019 IEEE 39th International
Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1337–
1347.
[19] P. S. Anjana, H. Attiya, S. Kumari, S. Peri, A. Somani, Efﬁcient concurrent exe-
cution of smart contracts in blockchains using object-based transactional memory,
in: Networked Systems, Springer, Cham, 2021, pp. 77–93.
[20] R. Guerraoui, M. Kapalka, Principles of Transactional Memory, Synthesis Lec-
tures on Distributed Computing Theory, 2010.
[21] P. Kuznetsov, S. Peri, Non-interference and local correctness in transactional
memory, Theor. Comput. Sci. 688 (2017) 103–116.
[22] M. P. Herlihy, J. M. Wing, Linearizability: A correctness condition for concurrent
objects, ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst., 1990.
[23] S. Peri, A. Singh, A. Somani, Efﬁcient means of achieving composability using
object based semantics in transactional memory systems, in: Networked Systems,
Springer, Cham, 2019, pp. 157–174.
[24] E. Muzzy, S. Rizvi, D. Sui, Ethereum by the numbers, https://media.
consensys.net/ethereum-by-the-numbers-3520f44565a9 ,
[Accessed 15-09-2020] (2018).
42
=== PDF PAGE 43 ===
[25] N. Shukla, Ethereum’s increased gas limit enables net-
work to hit 44 tps, https://eng.ambcrypto.com/
ethereums-increased-gas-limit-enables-network-to-hit-44-tps/
amp/, [Accessed 15-09-2020].
[26] P. S. Anjana, S. Kumari, S. Peri, S. Rathor, A. Somani, An efﬁcient framework
for concurrent execution of smart contracts, CoRR abs/1809.01326.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.01326
[27] Bitcoin Block Size, https://www.blockchain.com/en/charts, [Ac-
cessed 15-09-2020].
[28] Ethereum Stats, https://etherscan.io/charts, [Accessed 15-09-
2020].
43